

SCAPER
**Intellectual developmental disorder and retinitis pigmentosa, 618195 (3), AR**
Intellectual developmental disorder and retinitis pigmentosa is characterized by mild to moderate intellectual disability and typical features of RP. Patients experience reduced night vision, constriction of visual fields, and reduced visual acuity; optic disc pallor, attenuated retinal blood vessels, and bone-spicule pigmentation are seen on funduscopy. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder is observed in some patients (Tatour et al., 2017).
Tatour et al. (2017) studied 4 patients from 3 unrelated families with intellectual developmental disorder and retinitis pigmentosa. Mild to moderate intellectual disability was noted in childhood, and 3 of the patients were also diagnosed with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Reduced night vision developed in the second and third decades of life, at which time visual acuity was moderately to severely reduced, with concentric constriction of visual fields. Funduscopy revealed optic disc pallor, attenuated retinal blood vessels, and bone-spicule pigmentation. At ages 14 and 15 years, full-field electroretinograms were nonrecordable in 2 affected sisters (family A), reflecting reduced function of the entire retina. However, flash visual evoked potentials were normal in the older sister but abnormal in the younger sister, indicating more advanced degenerative disease involving the central retina in the latter patient. An unrelated affected woman (family B) showed more severe intellectual disability than the 2 sisters, and also exhibited bilateral subcapsular posterior cataracts and alopecia areata. The authors stated that additional genetic and/or environmental factors might be responsible for the observed interindividual and intrafamilial variability in severity of RP and intellectual disability; however, they suggested that the alopecia areata was coincidental. All 4 patients had normal hearing and showed no dysmorphic features; brain imaging, which was performed in 2 of the patients, was normal or nondiagnostic.



SHANK3
**Phelan-McDermid syndrome, 606232 (3), AD**
Phelan-McDermid syndrome is a developmental disorder with variable features. Common features include neonatal hypotonia, global developmental delay, normal to accelerated growth, absent to severely delayed speech, autistic behavior (see 209850), and minor dysmorphic features (Precht et al., 1998; Prasad et al., 2000; Durand et al., 2007).
Phelan et al. (2001) compared the phenotypes of 37 patients with 22q13 deletion syndrome with those of 24 published cases. All 37 patients presented with global developmental delay and absent or severely delayed expressive speech. Hypotonia was present in 97% of patients, and 95% showed normal to accelerated growth. Other less common features associated with this syndrome included increased tolerance to pain, dysplastic toenails, chewing behavior, fleshy hands, dysplastic ears, pointed chin, dolichocephaly, ptosis, tendency to overheat, and epicanthic folds.
Bonaglia et al. (2001) studied a 4.5-year-old boy with all the features of terminal 22q13.3 deletion syndrome. He had only slight delay in early motor milestones and severely compromised language development, in that he was unable to utter single words until he was 2 years old. At age 4.5 years, his verbal expression was limited to a few words. The boy had mild mental retardation (overall IQ of 54) and sharply limited verbal abilities (verbal IQ of 32 and performance IQ of 70). Neurologic examination showed mild hypotonia and minor dysmorphic features (dolichocephaly, epicanthic folds, and saddle nose with bulbous tip).
Wilson et al. (2003) noted that very few organ malformations had been reported in patients with 22q13 deletion syndrome.
Lindquist et al. (2005) reported the clinical features of 6 cases of 22q13 deletion in Denmark. Consistent phenotypic features were generalized developmental delay, hypotonia, compromised language development, normal or accelerated growth, and minor facial dysmorphisms. Other features included partial absence of corpus callosum, bilateral ureteropelvic structure, gastroesophageal reflux, and hearing loss.
Tabolacci et al. (2005) reported 2 brothers, born of nonconsanguineous parents, who had moderate to severe mental retardation, severe macrocephaly, obesity, big hands and feet, advanced bone age, and brain abnormalities, including frontal cortical atrophy. The height of both brothers, aged 24 and 15 years, respectively, was at the 10th centile, below the midparental target. They both exhibited autistic-like behavior in which they would stand still for several minutes with a fixed facial expression in an almost catatonic state; the parents also reported that they had a high pain threshold. FISH screening revealed a cryptic subtelomeric deletion of chromosome region 22q13 not present in either parent; segregation analysis showed the deletion to be of maternal origin, mostly likely due to germinal mosaicism. Tabolacci et al. (2005) noted similarities to Clark-Baraitser syndrome (617752).
Soorya et al. (2013) reported a serially ascertained sample of 32 patients with SHANK3 deletion or mutation who were evaluated by a team of child psychiatrists, neurologists, clinical geneticists, molecular geneticists, and psychologists. Patients were evaluated for autism spectrum disorder using the Autism Diagnostic Interview-Revised (ADI-R) and the Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule-G (ADOS-G). Thirty participants had 22q13.3 deletions ranging from 101 kb to 8.45 Mb, and 2 participants had de novo SHANK3 point mutations. The sample was characterized by high rates of autism spectrum disorder: 27 (84%) met criteria for autism spectrum disorder and 24 (75%) for autistic disorder. Most patients (77%) exhibited severe to profound intellectual disability, and only 5 (19%) used some words spontaneously to communicate. Dysmorphic features, hypotonia, gait disturbance, recurring upper respiratory tract infections, gastroesophageal reflux, and seizures were also common. Larger deletions were associated with increased levels of dysmorphic features, medical comorbidities, and social communication impairments related to autism. Analyses of individuals with small deletions or point mutations identified features related to SHANK3 haploinsufficiency, including ASD, seizures and abnormal EEG, hypotonia, sleep disturbances, abnormal brain MRI, gastroesophageal reflux, and certain dysmorphic features. In this study of 32 patients, 53% had large, fleshy hands; 47% had a bulbous nose; 44% had long eyelashes; 41% had ear anomalies; 34% had hypoplastic or dysplastic toenails; 31% had full lips, epicanthal folds, or macrocephaly; 25% had dolichocephaly, high arched palate, hyperextensibility, full cheeks, or periorbital fullness; and 22% had a pointed chin or abnormal spinal curvature. A smaller minority had other dysmorphic features. In terms of medical comorbidities, 88% had increased pain tolerance; 75% had hypotonia; 53% had recurring upper respiratory tract infections; 44% had gastroesophageal reflux; 41% had sleep disturbances or either febrile or nonfebrile seizures; and 38% had constipation and/or diarrhea or renal abnormalities. A smaller minority had other comorbidities.
Disciglio et al. (2014) reported 9 patients with features of Phelan-McDermid syndrome associated with interstitial deletions of chromosome 22q13 that did not include the SHANK3 gene. Clinical features included developmental delay, speech delay, hypotonia, and feeding difficulties. In addition, the majority of patients had macrocephaly.
**{Schizophrenia 15}, 613950 (3), AD**
Gauthier et al. (2010) identified a family in which a proband and 2 affected brothers had schizophrenia. The proband was of European ancestry and had a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder at age 19. He suffered from borderline mental retardation, with an IQ of 73, and had no autistic features. His brother was diagnosed with schizophrenia at age 21 and had a history of hyperactivity in childhood and 1 seizure at age 10. He was described as having mild mental retardation, but no definitive IQ was available. The third brother was diagnosed with schizophrenia and atypical chronic psychosis at age 16. He had moderate mental retardation, with an IQ of 36. The 3 brothers had no evidence of dysmorphic features, and no psychiatric illness was known to be present in the extended family except for major depression in the mother. An individual from a second family, a 23-year-old woman of European ancestry, was diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder at age 11 years. She had normal growth and no evidence of dysmorphic features but had speech impairment and poor academic and social performance with an IQ of 73. She had no evidence of autism on formal testing.



GBE1
**Glycogen storage disease IV, 232500 (3), AR**
Glycogen storage disease type IV is a clinically heterogeneous disorder. The typical 'classic' hepatic presentation is liver disease of childhood, progressing to lethal cirrhosis. The neuromuscular presentation of GSD IV is distinguished by age at onset into 4 groups: perinatal, presenting as fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) and perinatal death; congenital, with hypotonia, neuronal involvement, and death in early infancy; childhood, with myopathy or cardiomyopathy; and adult, with isolated myopathy or adult polyglucosan body disease (Bruno et al., 2004). The enzyme deficiency results in tissue accumulation of abnormal glycogen with fewer branching points and longer outer branches, resembling an amylopectin-like structure, also known as polyglucosan (Tay et al., 2004).
Bruno et al. (2007) provided a review of the neuromuscular forms of glycogen branching enzyme deficiency.
Classic Hepatic Form
Andersen (1956) originally reported GSD IV as 'familial cirrhosis of the liver with storage of abnormal glycogen.' Brown and Brown (1966) determined that the defect in GSD IV was a deficiency of the alpha-1,4-glucan branching enzyme.
Bao et al. (1996) noted that the most common form of GSD IV presents in the first 18 months of life with failure to thrive, hepatosplenomegaly, and liver cirrhosis. There is progression to portal hypertension, ascites, and liver failure, leading to death by age 5 years. A simple iodine test shows formation of a blue colored complex of glycogen and iodine. The liver shows the main involvement, resulting from a defect of amylo(1,4 to 1,6) transglucosidase (brancher enzyme).
Nonprogressive Hepatic Form
Less frequently, patients may have liver dysfunction without liver failure, referred to as 'nonprogressive hepatic GSD IV.' Greene et al. (1988) reported a 5-year-old boy who was first noted to have elevated serum transaminase levels and hepatomegaly at age 2 years following an acute febrile illness. Successive liver biopsies showed hepatocellular periodic-acid Schiff-positive diastase-resistant inclusions and hepatic fibrosis that was nonprogressive over 3 years. Enzymatic assays showed deficient branching enzyme in liver, skeletal muscle, and skin fibroblasts. The child showed normal growth and development.
McConkie-Rosell et al. (1996) found that 6 patients with nonprogressive hepatic GSD IV did not develop progressive liver cirrhosis, cardiac, or neurologic involvement, despite residual branching enzyme activity in skin fibroblasts that was indistinguishable from patients with more severe forms of GSD IV. The authors concluded that residual enzyme activity could not be used to predict the clinical course in GSD IV, that not all patients require liver transplant, and that caution should be used in genetic counseling.
Fatal Perinatal Neuromuscular Form
Alegria et al. (1999) reported hydrops fetalis as a presenting manifestation of glycogen storage disease type IV. The infant, delivered by cesarean section at 34 weeks, had generalized edema, severe hypotonia, and arthrogryposis of the lower limbs at birth. There were no signs of cirrhosis or liver failure. She died on the fourth day of life.
Cox et al. (1999) reported 3 sib fetuses who were shown to have type IV glycogen storage disease by pathologic and biochemical studies, with onset of hydrops, limb contractures, and akinesia in the early second trimester.
Congenital Neuromuscular Form
Zellweger et al. (1972) reported infantile onset of GSD IV with hypotonia.
McMaster et al. (1979) reported a 30-month old girl with GSD IV in whom extensive involvement of the nervous system was found at autopsy. In a review of the literature, the authors noted that approximately 50% of GSD IV patients have neuromuscular signs and symptoms.
Tang et al. (1994) reported a neonate with GSD IV who presented with severe hypotonia and dilated cardiomyopathy. The classic clinical manifestation of liver cirrhosis was not present, although amylopectin-like inclusions were found in hepatocytes. He died of cardiorespiratory failure at 4 weeks of age. In the child reported by Tang et al. (1994), Bao et al. (1996) identified a mutation in the GBE1 gene (607839.0001).
Tay et al. (2004) reported 2 unrelated patients with the congenital variant of GSD IV confirmed by mutation in the GBE1 gene (607839.0008). Both pregnancies were complicated by polyhydramnios, and both neonates showed hypotonia and poor respiratory effort at birth. Only 1 had contractures. Both died within the first weeks of life. Branching enzyme activities were 0.9% and 0.8% of normal controls. Postmortem examination of 1 infant showed pale, atrophic skeletal muscles, and PAS-positive, diastase-resistant globules in liver, heart, skeletal muscle, and neurons of the brain and spinal cord.
Bruno et al. (2004) reported 2 sibs with congenital GSD IV confirmed by mutation in the GBE1 gene (607839.0011; 607839.0012). In both cases, pregnancy was complicated by polyhydramnios, reduced fetal movements, and fetal hydrops. At birth, both infants had severe hypotonia, hyporeflexia, and no spontaneous respiration. Death occurred at ages 4 months and 4 weeks, respectively, due to cardiorespiratory failure. Autopsy showed hypertrophy of the left cardiac ventricle. Residual GBE1 activity in fibroblasts was less than 5%.
Assereto et al. (2007) reported 2 unrelated newborns who showed severe hypotonia at birth and died of cardiorespiratory failure at ages 4 and 12 weeks, respectively. Both pregnancies were complicated by polyhydramnios and reduced fetal movements. One infant had equinovarus feet with flexion contractures. GBE1 activity in cultured fibroblasts was less than 5% in both cases. Molecular analysis identified a homozygous null mutation in the GBE1 gene in each patient (607839.0017 and 607839.0018, respectively).
Childhood Neuromuscular Form
Guerra et al. (1986) reported an 8-year-old child with Andersen syndrome. Servidei et al. (1987) reported a 7.5-year-old girl with exercise intolerance and exertional dyspnea. She developed congestive heart failure and died 1 year later. Endomyocardial biopsy showed abundant PAS-positive, diastase-resistant cytoplasmic deposits that were also seen in muscle, skin, and liver specimens. Glycogen branching enzyme was absent in all postmortem tissues.
In 3 Turkish male sibs suffering from chronic progressive myopathy, Reusche et al. (1992) identified a mild juvenile form of type IV glycogenosis which was confirmed by the finding of profound deficiency of the brancher enzyme. They pointed out that when polyglucosan inclusions are observed in myofibers, it is mandatory to examine muscle tissue for brancher enzyme activity since this enzyme activity was normal in circulating erythrocytes and leukocytes in all 3 affected sibs and their parents; the disorder in this family was limited to muscle tissues.
Schroder et al. (1993) reported a case of juvenile type IV glycogenosis with total branching enzyme deficiency in skeletal muscle and liver tissue in a male who presented with severe myopathy, dilated cardiomyopathy, heart failure, dysmorphic features, and subclinical neuropathy. He died from sudden cardiac death at age 19. His 15-year-old brother had similar clinical and histologic findings.
Bruno et al. (2004) reported a 4-year-old boy with childhood neuromuscular GSD IV confirmed by mutation in the GBE1 gene (607839.0006; 607839.0013). He developed generalized hypotonia at age 11 months; at age 3 years, he had myopathic face, muscular hypotrophy and hypotonia, and waddling gait with hyperlordosis. Serum creatine kinase was normal, and there were no signs of liver involvement. Residual GBE1 activity in fibroblasts was 15 to 25%.
Adult Neuromuscular Form with Isolated Myopathy
Ferguson et al. (1983) presented the case of a 59-year-old man with a 30-year history of a limb-girdle muscular dystrophy due to a presumably allelic form of this disease. Symptoms began at age 29 years with progressive difficulty walking up stairs. He showed hyperlordotic posture, waddling gait, and proximal limb weakness which was greater in the arms than the legs.
**Polyglucosan body disease, adult form, 263570 (3), AR**
Adult polyglucosan body neuropathy is a late-onset, slowly progressive disorder affecting the central and peripheral nervous systems. Patients typically present after age 40 years with a variable combination of cognitive impairment, pyramidal tetraparesis, peripheral neuropathy, and neurogenic bladder. Other manifestations include cerebellar dysfunction and extrapyramidal signs. The pathologic hallmark of the disorder is the widespread accumulation of round, intracellular polyglucosan bodies throughout the nervous system, which are confined to neuronal and astrocytic processes (summary by Lossos et al., 1998).
Robitaille et al. (1980) reported 4 patients with a clinically and histopathologically unusual disorder. Two of them were sibs; in Case 4, the authors stated that 'she is the sister of Case 3.' Curiously, the sex in Case 3 was not given explicitly or implicitly. The clinical manifestations were those of progressive lower and upper motor neuron deficits, marked sensory loss in the legs, neurogenic bladder, and, in 2 of the 4, dementia. Autopsy in 2 showed a profusion of microscopic bodies resembling corpora amylacea or Lafora bodies, but restricted to processes of neurons and astrocytes, rather than being perikaryotic. Similar but especially large bodies were seen within axons of sural nerves taken at biopsy from the other 2 patients. In addition to Lafora disease, polyglucosan bodies occur in type IV glycogenosis, in the 'normal' course of aging, in rats rendered diabetic by alloxan, and in a form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (205250). Cases similar to those of Robitaille et al. (1980) were reported by Peress et al. (1979) and Suzuki et al. (1971).
Lossos et al. (1991) described 2 unrelated patients diagnosed by sural nerve biopsy. Both were offspring of consanguineous marriages. They presented clinically with late-onset pyramidal tetraparesis, micturition difficulties, peripheral neuropathy, and mild cognitive impairment. Magnetic resonance imaging showed extensive white matter abnormalities in both. Lossos et al. (1991) found that branching enzyme activity in the polymorphonuclear leukocytes of the patients was about 15% of control values, whereas their children displayed values of 50 to 60%, consistent with heterozygous state of an autosomal recessive disorder.
Bruno et al. (1993) analyzed branching enzyme activity in muscle, peripheral nerve, and leukocytes from 2 Ashkenazi-Jewish patients with adult polyglucosan body disease and from 1 African American patient and 3 Caucasian patients with the same clinical and pathologic features. One patient was a 66-year-old woman with progressive gait disturbance for 13 years and urinary frequency and mild urgency incontinence for 5 years. She had signs of peripheral neuropathy. A brother died with the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis, but autopsy revealed adult polyglucosan body disease with marked central and peripheral nerve system involvement. A 46-year-old French Canadian woman had progressive gait disturbance and urinary incontinence over an 8-year period. Branching enzyme activity was normal in muscle specimens from all patients. The activity was markedly decreased in both leukocytes and peripheral nerve specimens of the 2 Jewish patients, and normal in nerve tissue and leukocytes from all non-Jewish patients. Bruno et al. (1993) concluded that there is a deficiency of branching enzyme in a subgroup of patients with APBD, in their experience of only Ashkenazi Jewish patients, and that APBD has more than one biochemical basis. Since the enzyme levels were normal in muscle, even in the Jewish patients, the defect is tissue-specific.
Rifai et al. (1994) reported the case of a 56-year-old man who presented with lower-limb stiffness and weakness that had progressed for 15 years. They found that he had a dementia that affected cortical and subcortical functions and that the cognitive deficits correlated with MRI findings of cortical atrophy and white matter abnormalities.
Lossos et al. (1998) reported 7 patients with APBD from 5 unrelated Jewish families: 4 were of Ashkenazi origin and 1 descended from both Ashkenazi and Sephardi ancestors. All patients manifested signs of CNS and PNS involvement, including gait abnormalities, micturition problems, paresthesias, and cognitive impairment. Brain MRI showed white matter abnormalities, and sural nerve biopsies showed intraaxonal polyglucosan bodies. None of the patients had cardiomyopathy or liver dysfunction. Leukocyte GBE activity was undetectable in all 7 patients and was reduced to about 50% in their tested children.
Mochel et al. (2012) reviewed the clinical features of 50 patients from 47 families with APBD confirmed by genetic analysis or GBE1 enzyme deficiency (less than 25% of controls). Most of the patients (73%) were of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, although patients of Latin American, Pacific Islander, Caucasian, and Cambodian background were also identified. Almost all patients developed symptoms after age 40, most commonly bladder dysfunction. Impotence was also a common complaint among men. Gait difficulties due to spastic paraplegia were the second most common problem, and about 50% of patients lost ambulation in the mid-sixties. Most patients (94%) had loss of vibration sense in the lower limbs associated with an axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy with reduced compound motor action potentials. Sural nerve biopsy showed abundant intraaxonal polyglucosan bodies. Other variable common features included spasticity in the upper limbs (12%), saccadic pursuit (39%), slow saccades (20%), orthostatic hypotension (31%), and bradykinesia (14%). Brain and spinal imaging showed medullary and spinal atrophy, often with enlarged ventricles, cerebellar atrophy, thin corpus callosum, and periventricular and brainstem white matter lesions. Almost half of patients had mild attention and memory deficits. Overall, the patients had a median survival of 70 years, which is 8 years less than the general population.



FAM20C
**Raine syndrome, 259775 (3), AR**
Raine syndrome is a neonatal osteosclerotic bone dysplasia of early and aggressive onset that usually results in death within the first few weeks of life, although there have been some reports of survival into childhood. Radiographic studies show a generalized increase in the density of all bones and a marked increase in the ossification of the skull. The increased ossification of the basal structures of the skull and facial bones underlies the characteristic facial features, which include narrow prominent forehead, proptosis, depressed nasal bridge, and midface hypoplasia. Periosteal bone formation is also characteristic of this disorder and differentiates it from osteopetrosis and other known lethal and nonlethal osteosclerotic bone dysplasias. The periosteal bone formation typically extends along the diaphysis of long bones adjacent to areas of cellular soft tissue (summary by Simpson et al., 2009).
Kan and Kozlowski (1992) described the postmortem findings in an infant with generalized osteosclerosis and craniofacial dysplasia representing a lethal syndrome identical to that previously reported in single cases by Raine et al. (1989) and Kingston et al. (1991). The female fetus described by Raine et al. (1989) had the combination of microcephaly, exophthalmos, hypoplastic nose and midface, gum hyperplasia, cleft palate, apparently low-set ears, and osteosclerosis. The facies in the 2 earlier cases and that reported by Kan and Kozlowski (1992) was 'fishlike.' The choanal passages were atretic in the patient of Kingston et al. (1991) and severely stenotic in the patient of Kan and Kozlowski (1992). The patients of Raine et al. (1989) and of Kan and Kozlowski (1992) had hypoplastic lungs. Multiple fracture-like rib lesions were seen on x-ray in the cases of Kingston et al. (1991) and Kan and Kozlowski (1992) but were not confirmed on histologic examination. The case of Kingston et al. (1991) had consanguineous parents.
FitzPatrick et al. (1998) described a lethal multiple malformation syndrome they called desmosterolosis (602398) because of a generalized accumulation of desmosterol. Their patient had many features of Raine syndrome, including macrocephaly, hypoplastic nasal bridge, thick alveolar ridges, and gingival nodules. However, FitzPatrick et al. (1998) also studied postmortem tissues from the case of Raine syndrome reported by Kan and Kozlowski (1992) and found no accumulation of desmosterol.
Al Mane et al. (1996) demonstrated that intracranial calcification is a component of Raine syndrome. The patient reported by Al Mane et al. (1996) was the second of 3 affected sibs reported by Rejjal (1998). The parents were first cousins and had 2 other children who were normal. The first affected child, a female, lived only a few days and was described as having microcephaly, bulging eyes, choanal atresia, and generalized osteosclerosis. Ultrasound and CT studies of the brain showed prominent calcifications, and a brief report of the case was published by Patel et al. (1992) as an example of osteopetrosis. The second affected child, a boy, was reported by Al Mane et al. (1996). Respiratory distress due to choanal atresia was not relieved by conventional surgical treatment, and tracheostomy was performed. The child died at 8 weeks of age. Radiographic studies showed diffuse osteosclerosis and widespread periosteal thickening of mandible, clavicles, scapulae, ribs, and long bones. Widespread focal cerebral calcifications were demonstrated in the periventricular white matter and basal ganglia with some meningeal calcifications as well, and these were thought to correspond to the histologic calcifications reported in the brain by Kan and Kozlowski (1992). The third affected child from the fifth pregnancy was recognized to have the same syndrome by prenatal ultrasound examination. At birth the findings were virtually identical to those in the other sibs. Autosomal recessive inheritance seems very likely as the cause of this distinctive syndrome.
Shalev et al. (1999) described a newborn girl with a lethal sclerosing bone dysplasia leading to prenatal skeletal alterations and microcephaly, proptosis, hypoplastic nose and midface, small jaw, cleft palate, hypertrophied gums, intracranial calcifications, and generalized osteosclerosis. The patient closely resembled 6 previously reported infants that had been categorized as having Raine syndrome. Autosomal recessive inheritance was postulated based on parental consanguinity in several of the previous cases and in their patient.
Acosta et al. (2000) reported a preterm male infant, the first child of a consanguineous union, whose physical examination revealed craniofacial disproportion with microcephaly, wide fontanels, exophthalmos, low nasal root and hypoplastic nose, long philtrum, small mouth, high arched and narrow palate, micrognathia, dysplastic, low-set, and rounded ears, short neck, and arthrogryposis. Postmortem findings included hypoplastic lungs. Radiologic examination showed mild and localized increase of bone density in the cranial vault and skull base and facial bones and undermodeling in the long bones. Acosta et al. (2000) considered the findings characteristic of Raine dysplasia but with mild bone involvement, with only a localized bone sclerosis and absence of prenatal fractures. The consanguinity of the parents reinforced the hypothesis of autosomal recessive inheritance in this disorder.
Hulskamp et al. (2003) reported a consanguineous Turkish couple with 3 affected children in 7 pregnancies, including a fetus of 24 weeks' gestation with full clinical and autopsy findings consistent with Raine syndrome. In addition to the generalized osteosclerosis and appositional new bone formation seen in Raine syndrome, these patients had previously unreported meso- and severe telebrachyphalangy and urogenital anomalies.
Al-Gazali et al. (2003) reported an infant from an Arab family who presented at birth with severe craniofacial anomalies including a wide anterior fontanel, exophthalmos, severe depression of the nasal bridge with a hypoplastic midface, bilateral choanal atresia, and a large protruding tongue. All the limbs were short and the thorax was small. Radiologically, there was increased bone density in some bones, periosteal new bone formation, and marked bowing of the femurs, tibias, and ulnas. Al-Gazali et al. (2003) suggested that osteosclerosis in Raine syndrome is not necessarily severe and generalized, and that bowing of the long bones is another variable radiologic feature of the syndrome.
Chitayat et al. (2007) described prenatal ultrasound, autopsy, and neuropathologic findings in a stillborn infant with Raine syndrome, the offspring of nonconsanguineous parents. A 19-week ultrasound showed no striking abnormalities, and only a retrospective review showed hypertelorism and flat profile. Thus, most of the abnormalities, including intracerebral calcifications, seem to present late in pregnancy.
Survival Beyond Infancy
Simpson et al. (2009) reported 2 unrelated boys with Raine syndrome who survived infancy and were aged 8 and 11 years. At birth, both had features typical of Raine syndrome, with craniofacial dysmorphism including brachycephaly, downslanted eyes, hypoplastic nose, and small downturned mouth. Proptosis was present at birth in one of the boys, but in the other it only became apparent at 9 months of age; the latter child also had a scaphocephalic, saddle-shaped head with a widely split metopic suture and very large anterior fontanel. Skeletal surveys revealed sclerotic bone disease in both patients. Both had hydrocephalus requiring placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt, following which their early development, which had been impaired, was significantly improved. The 8-year-old boy underwent examination at 6 years of age, at which time tracheostomy due to poor central respiratory control and obstructive sleep apnea was considered. Craniofacial examination revealed turribrachycephaly, plagiocephaly, downslanting palpebral fissures, proptosis, depressed nasal bridge, small nose, protruding tongue, thick alveolar margins, high palate, abnormal teeth, and low-set ears. Radiography at 7 years of age revealed prominent metaphyseal sclerosis of the long bones and diffuse abnormalities of the skull, with thickening and coarse trabeculation and prominent mastoid bulges. At 11 years of age, the other boy had turribrachycephaly, hypertelorism, arched eyebrows, an inferiorly placed right eye, and low-set and protuberant ears with hearing aids in place for mixed hearing loss. Other features included a flat nasal bridge with rounded and bulbous nasal tip and prominent alae nasi, sunken midface, wide mouth with large tongue, and relative prognathism, and he was secondarily edentulous. He also had pectus excavatum, bulbous fingertips, thick fingers, and large halluces. He had visual impairment and dysphagia, and also displayed self-stimulating behavior. Both boys had short stature, with heights at or below the 5th centile; the 8-year-old's head circumference was in the 10th to 25th centile, whereas that of the 11-year-old was less than the 5th centile (50th centile for a 10-month-old infant). Both had severe developmental delay.
Fradin et al. (2011) reported 2 sisters, born of first-cousin parents of Algerian origin, who had an attenuated phenotype of Raine syndrome with normal psychomotor development at ages 4 years and 1 year, respectively. The older sister attended regular school and had normal speech and pictural drawing skills. Her height, weight, and occipitofrontal circumference (OFC) were within normal ranges, and she had no sensorial anomalies or history of respiratory distress. She displayed attenuation of the dysmorphic features, with a high palate and small teeth with enamel dysplasia. The younger sister had short stature but weight and OFC were in the medium range, and she displayed moderate craniofacial dysmorphism. Both sisters had stenosis of the pyriform aperture without choanal atresia that was surgically repaired, and both had intracranial as well as renal calcifications. X-rays showed static or decreasing osteosclerosis compared to earlier radiographs.



ANKRD11
**KBG syndrome, 148050 (3), AD**
KBG syndrome is characterized by macrodontia of the upper central incisors, distinctive craniofacial findings, short stature, skeletal anomalies, and neurologic involvement that includes global developmental delay, seizures, and intellectual disability (summary by Sirmaci et al., 2011). Sirmaci et al. (2011) noted that it is likely that KBG syndrome is underdiagnosed, since many of the features, including intellectual disability, are mild, and none of the features is a prerequisite for diagnosis.
Herrmann et al. (1975) described 2 families in which multiple members had short stature, characteristic facies (telecanthus, wide eyebrows, brachycephaly), macrodontia, mental retardation, and skeletal anomalies (abnormal vertebrae, short metacarpals, short femoral necks). Male-to-male transmission occurred in 1 family. (The designation KBG syndrome follows Opitz's practice of using the initials of affected families' surnames.) Fryns and Haspeslagh (1984) described what appeared to be the same disorder in 2 sisters and their mother.
Parloir et al. (1977) reported an extensive family segregating KBG syndrome. Soekarman et al. (1994) provided follow-up information on 3 affected brothers reported by Parloir et al. (1977). They had an affected sister, and 3 other brothers, as well as their mother, were said to have partial expression. The adult height of the affected brothers was far below the 3rd centile, with arm spans exceeding stature by at least 9 cm. Relative shortness of the trunk was apparently secondary to mild vertebral skeletal anomalies observed at a young age, with anterior wedging of vertebrae and irregular upper and lower plates. Karyotype was normal male.
Zollino et al. (1994) diagnosed KBG syndrome in 6 sporadic cases. Two of their patients had hypoplasia of cerebellar vermis, 1 had cystic dysplasia of the kidney, and 1 had megalocornea; see 249310.
Devriendt et al. (1998) described the KBG syndrome in a mother and her daughter. At the age of 8 years and 2 months the daughter showed, on x-ray of the skull, very broad unerupted permanent central frontal incisors. The mother had very broad frontal incisors. The daughter had ventricular septal defect, treated surgically. During childhood, she suffered from chronic constipation and recurrent respiratory tract infections. She was retarded with an intelligence quotient of 58 at the age of 8 years. The mother was mildly mentally retarded and had required special education.
Smithson et al. (2000) reported 2 additional cases of KBG syndrome. They suggested that the diagnostic criteria should include hypertelorism, macrodontia, short stature (less than the 10th percentile), delayed bone maturation, skeletal anomalies, and developmental delay (IQ less than 80).
Tekin et al. (2004) reported a family from central Anatolia in which a father and 2 sons had KBG syndrome. All 3 patients had developmental delay and mild to moderate mental retardation. Physical features included short stature (less than 3rd percentile), a triangular face, low anterior and posterior hairlines, bushy eyebrows, large prominent ears, a long philtrum, anteverted nostrils with hypoplastic alae nasi, and wide upper central incisors. The hands were short with clinodactyly, and 1 of the sons had bilateral accessory cervical ribs, thoracic kyphosis, and irregular vertebral arches. The father also had thoracic kyphosis. All 3 men had undescended testes.
Brancati et al. (2004) reviewed 29 cases of the KBG syndrome in the literature and described 8 new patients. Six of the new patients were sporadic in occurrence, but in 2 families the disorder was transmitted from mildly affected mothers to their affected children. EEG anomalies with or without seizures, mixed hearing loss, palatal anomalies with secondary speech disorder, distinct age-related behavior (hyperactivity, anxiety, and poor concentration), and cryptorchidism are possible additional characteristics of the KBG syndrome. Less common manifestations were posterior fossa malformations, eye defects, and congenital heart defects.
Maegawa et al. (2004) diagnosed KBG syndrome in 3 unrelated boys and the mother of 1 of them. In addition to the characteristic macrodontia and dental anomalies, the patients had atypical facies and skeletal anomalies, including hand anomalies in 3 patients. Mental retardation and developmental delay were also present in 3 patients. In the mother-son case, the mother had a milder phenotype.
Skjei et al. (2007) described male twins with KBG syndrome and reviewed 46 published cases. They recommended that 4 or more of the 8 major criteria be present to make the diagnosis of KBG syndrome: macrodontia of the upper central incisors, characteristic facial appearance, hand anomalies, neurologic involvement, bone age 2 standard deviations below the mean, costovertebral anomalies, postnatal short stature, and presence of a first-degree relative with KBG syndrome. Skjei et al. (2007) stated that macrodontia had been observed in over 95% of reported cases but noted that the high frequency might be due to ascertainment bias.



NSD1
**Leukemia, acute myeloid, 601626 (1), AD, Somatic mutation**
Shields et al. (2003) published a case report on acute myeloid leukemia that presented as bilateral orbital myeloid sarcoma (or chloroma) in a previously healthy 25-month-old boy. Bone marrow biopsy revealed blasts and cells with maturing monocytic features. A final diagnosis of M5b AML was made. The authors reviewed the literature and concluded that leukemia may be the most likely diagnosis in a child with bilateral soft tissue orbital tumors.
**Sotos syndrome 1, 117550 (3), AD**
Sotos syndrome is a neurologic disorder characterized by overgrowth from the prenatal stage through childhood, with advanced bone age, an unusual face with large skull, acromegalic features and pointed chin, occasional brain anomalies and seizures, and impaired intellectual development (summary by Kurotaki et al., 2002).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Sotos Syndrome
Sotos syndrome-2 (SOTOS2; 614753) is caused by mutation in the NFIX gene (164005) on chromosome 19p13, and SOTOS3 (617169) is caused by mutation in the APC2 gene (612034) on chromosome 19p13.
Weaver syndrome (277590), which shows considerable phenotypic overlap with Sotos syndrome, has been shown to be caused by mutation in the EZH2 gene (601573) on chromosome 7q36.
Sotos et al. (1964) described 5 children with a disorder characterized by excessively rapid growth, acromegalic features, and a nonprogressive cerebral disorder with mental retardation. High-arched palate and prominent jaw were noted in several of them. Birth length was between the 90th and 97th centiles in all. Bone age was advanced in most.
Hook and Reynolds (1967) reported that affected children have large hands and feet from birth. Growth is rapid in the first years of life but final height may not be excessive. Bone age is advanced. The skull is large with moderate prognathism. Mild dilation of the cerebral ventricles, nonspecific EEG changes, and seizures have been observed. Poor coordination and mental retardation are features. In 2 patients, Bejar et al. (1970) found abnormal dermatoglyphics, normal growth hormone levels, and high levels of valine, isoleucine and leucine in the blood. The glycine-to-valine ratio seemed particularly useful in distinguishing patients from controls.
Ruvalcaba et al. (1980) found hamartomatous polyps of the intestine and melanin spots of the penis in 2 males with the Sotos syndrome. Halal (1983) reported that the older of the boys she reported with cerebral gigantism had pigmented spots on the genitalia and that the father had been found to have a rectal polyp--findings like those in the 2 unrelated adult males reported by Ruvalcaba et al. (1980).
Kaneko et al. (1987) found congenital heart defects in 5 of 10 patients with typical Sotos syndrome. Noreau et al. (1998) found that 3 of 14 Sotos syndrome patients had congenital heart defects. In a literature review, they found another 17 patients with variable cardiac defects, mostly closure defects, making an overall incidence of approximately 8%.
Goldstein et al. (1988) described 2 unrelated children with macrocephaly, excessive growth, strabismus, hypotonia and developmental delay, and improvement with age.
In a review, Cole and Hughes (1990) emphasized that the handicaps in Sotos syndrome are fewer than previously believed and tend to improve with age. The latter feature makes identification of affected adults difficult. Cole and Hughes (1994) clinically assessed 79 patients with a provisional diagnosis of Sotos syndrome and evaluated their photographs between ages 1 and 6 years. These photographs, together with photographs of first-degree relatives, also at ages 1 to 6 years, were reviewed by 4 clinical geneticists. In 41 probands, but no first-degree relatives, the facial gestalt was thought to be characteristic of Sotos syndrome. Comparison of anthropometric measurements, bone age, and developmental delay in these 41 probands showed marked differences between them and the remaining 38 probands. Length was identified as the most significantly increased prenatal parameter. In childhood, occipitofrontal head circumference (OFC), height, and weight were all increased. OFC remained above the 97th percentile in all but one case throughout childhood and adulthood, whereas height and weight had a tendency to return toward the mean. This 'normalization' was more pronounced in females and was probably related to their early puberty. Early developmental delay and an advanced bone age were seen in 100% and 84% of cases, respectively. Cole and Hughes (1994) suggested that facial gestalt, growth pattern, bone age, and developmental delay are the major diagnostic criteria. Using these criteria, no affected first-degree relatives were identified.
Scarpa et al. (1994) described a sister and brother with macrocrania and coarse face (frontal bossing, highly arched palate, prognathism, pointed chin, large ears). Psychomotor development of the sister, who also had advanced osseous maturation, improved significantly at the age of 7 years. Accelerated growth with normal bone age, optic atrophy, renal agenesis with contralateral double kidney, and significant mental retardation (IQ, 45) were shown in the brother at 3.5 years of age. The father of these children was tall, with macrocrania and large hands and feet. He had had learning difficulties in school and was a manual laborer. Scarpa et al. (1994) suggested that these children and their father showed different manifestations of Sotos syndrome. Allanson and Cole (1996) presented anthropometric evaluation of the head in 45 patients with Sotos syndrome between age 1 and 25 years. With increasing age, the face lengthens and the chin becomes more striking.
Opitz et al. (1998) reported an affected mother and daughter. The mother was described as a large infant and 'as tall as her teacher in school.' Her adult height was 185.4 cm, and she had mandibular prognathism and a prominent pointed chin. The daughter showed a prominent forehead with sparseness of frontal hair and a 'ruddy' or flushed complexion, especially of the nose and perioral area. She had prominent features of the congenital hypotonia/lymphedema sequence with hypermobile joints, especially at the knees and ankles, lymphedema nails (especially toenails), and a high total ridge count (TRC) of the fingertip dermatoglyphics. The mother also had a high TRC and a receding frontal hairline.
Robertson and Bankier (1999) reported 3 children with anthropometric and dysmorphologic features of classic Sotos syndrome in association with redundant skin folds, joint hypermobility, and, in 2 of the 3, vesicoureteric reflux. Robertson and Bankier (1999) thought the associated features suggested a coexisting connective tissue disorder. All the patients had a normal bone age. Although Sotos syndrome in its classically described form was not present, Robertson and Bankier (1999) concluded that this entity might reflect a related, perhaps allelic, condition.
Tatton-Brown et al. (2005) reviewed the clinical phenotype of 239 individuals with NSD1 abnormalities and found that facial dysmorphism, learning disability, and childhood overgrowth were present in 90% of individuals; however, both height and head circumference were within the normal range in 10% of individuals, indicating that overgrowth is not obligatory for the diagnosis of Sotos syndrome. A broad spectrum of associated clinical features was also present, the occurrence of which was largely independent of genotype: individuals with identical mutations had different phenotypes, all features present in patients with microdeletions were also observed in patients with mutations, and there was no correlation between deletion size and clinical phenotype.
Kotilainen et al. (2009) studied the dental manifestations of Sotos syndrome and found that one or more premolar teeth were absent in 9 (69%) of 13 affected children and adolescents. All of the patients with hypodontia had a heterozygous mutation in the NSD1 gene. The patient with the most severe phenotype of tooth agenesis, involving not only the second premolars and third molars but also 1 mandibular incisor, had a microdeletion encompassing the entire NSD1 gene, whereas the 4 patients with the mildest tooth phenotype included both patients with only missense mutations, suggesting that the severity of tooth agenesis might be related to the type of mutation. More than half of the patients had enamel defects or excessive tooth wear. Dental age, based on tooth formation, was within the normal range.
Fryssira et al. (2010) reported 2 boys with typical features of Sotos syndrome and mutations in the NSD1 gene; 1 patient also had cryptorchidism and vertebral anomalies. The authors noted that despite the wide range of phenotypic features, molecular analysis can correctly identify Sotos syndrome.
Tumor Formation
Maldonado et al. (1984) reported the association of malignant tumors in Sotos syndrome. Nance et al. (1990) described a 15-month-old child with Sotos syndrome and a paraspinal neuroblastoma. From this and other evidence, they concluded that children with this disorder may be at an increased risk for developing tumors. Gorlin et al. (1990) estimated a risk of 3.9% of benign or malignant tumors in Sotos syndrome. The same excess of neoplasms is present in other overgrowth syndromes. Le Marec et al. (1999) reported that one of a monozygotic twin pair, both of whom had Sotos syndrome, developed a diffuse gastric carcinoma containing signet ring cells at the age of 26. The young age of occurrence of this gastric carcinoma suggested a genetic factor. Leonard et al. (2000) reported 2 children with Sotos syndrome who had benign sacrococcygeal teratomas. Given that Sotos syndrome and sacrococcygeal teratoma are rare events, the authors suggested that these tumors may be due to the effects of overgrowth on tumor development.



KANSL1
**Koolen-De Vries syndrome, 610443 (3), AD**
Koolen-De Vries syndrome is characterized by moderate to severe intellectual disability, hypotonia, friendly demeanor, and highly distinctive facial features, including tall, broad forehead, long face, upslanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, tubular nose with bulbous nasal tip, and large ears. More variable features include cardiac or genitourinary anomalies and seizures (summary by Koolen et al., 2012).
Using array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) in a study of 1,200 mentally retarded individuals, Koolen et al. (2006) identified 3 individuals with interstitial, overlapping 17q21.31 microdeletions and a clearly recognizable clinical phenotype of mental retardation, hypotonia, and characteristic face. All 3 individuals showed severe hypotonia from birth onwards, leading to severely delayed motor development. None of the individuals could stand and/or walk before the age of 3 years. Facial features included long hypotonic face with ptosis, blepharophimosis, large and low-set ears, tubular pear-shaped nose with bulbous nasal tip, long columella with hypoplastic alae nasi, and a broad chin. In addition, they all had long fingers, nasal speech, and an amiable and friendly disposition. The deletions encompassed the MAPT (157140) and CRHR1 (122561) genes and were associated with a common inversion polymorphism. All 3 deletions were confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization and shown to have arisen de novo.
Koolen et al. (2008) described the clinical and molecular features of 22 patients with 17q21.31 deletion syndrome, including 11 previously reported patients and 11 newly ascertained patients. Common features included developmental delay with mild to moderate mental retardation, characteristic facies with long face, high forehead, large, prominent ears, upward-slanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, bulbous nasal tip, pear-shaped nose, and long, slender features. Other features included cardiac septal defects, seizures, and cryptorchidism. Most patients had a friendly demeanor.
Tan et al. (2009) reported 11 patients with the 17q21.31 deletion syndrome. The facial appearance was characterized by a long face with tall or broad forehead, upslanting palpebral fissures, anteverted ears with thickened or overfolded helices, tubular or pear-shaped nose with bulbous tip, and frequently open mouth. The facial features became more distinctive in early childhood compared to infancy. All patients had hypotonia, global delay, and expressive language delay, and most had a friendly disposition. Congenital cardiac defects included pulmonary stenosis in 3 (27.3%), septal defects in 2 (18.2%), and bicuspid aortic valve in 2 (18.2%), and 1 patient had a dilated aortic root. Other features included urologic anomalies, such as cryptorchidism, hypospadias, vesicoureteric reflux, duplex kidney, renal scarring, and hydronephrosis, and CNS anomalies, such as seizures, corpus callosum defects, and ventriculomegaly. Joint hypermobility and/or hip dislocation/dysplasia were commonly seen, as were ectodermal anomalies of the hair, skin, and teeth. Previously unreported features included persistent fetal fingertip pads, recurrent elbow dislocation, conductive hearing loss, dental abnormalities, and hypertension due to renal scarring.
In a study of copy number variants (CNVs) in 15,767 children with intellectual disability and various congenital defects (cases) compared to CNVs in 8,329 unaffected adult controls, Cooper et al. (2011) identified the 17q21.31 deletion in 23 individuals and atypical deletions in 3 individuals. Detailed clinical information on 2 individuals with the atypical deletion showed typical phenotypic features of the syndrome.
Zollino et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated girls with Koolen-De Vries syndrome due to de novo heterozygous truncating mutations in the KANSL1 gene (612452.0001 and 612452.0002). Both had failure to thrive in infancy, hypotonia, and delayed psychomotor development. Characteristic facial features included broad forehead, upslanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, 'pear'-shaped nose with bulbous nasal tip, long philtrum, large ears, broad chin, abnormal hair texture, and sparse eyebrows. Both also had joint hyperextensibility. Neither had seizures, heart defects, or urinary anomalies. Both had a happy disposition.
Koolen et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated patients with Koolen-De Vries syndrome due to de novo heterozygous truncating mutations in the KANSL1 gene (612452.0003 and 612452.0004). Both patients had delayed psychomotor development, intellectual disability, hypotonia, friendly personality, and characteristic facial features, including broad forehead, long face, upslanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, and tubular nose with bulbous nasal tip. Both also had joint laxity, slender lower limbs, pes planus, sacral dimple, and abnormal hair color or texture. One patient had additional features, including cleft lip/palate, ventricular septal defect, cryptorchidism, hypermetropia, strabismus, and scoliosis.
Koolen et al. (2016) compared the clinical features of 45 patients with KDVS, including 33 with a 17q21.31 deletion and 12 with a KANSL1 mutation. Three of the patients had previously been reported. There were no differences of clinical importance between the 2 groups, indicating that haploinsufficiency for KANKL1 is sufficient to cause the core phenotype. However, 44% of those in the deletion group had large ears, compared to none in the mutation group. The patients had strikingly similar dysmorphic features, including long face, upslanting and narrow palpebral fissures, ptosis, epicanthal folds, tubular- or pear-shaped nose with bulbous nasal tip, and everted lower lip. Many had poor overall growth or short stature. Most had hypotonia, particularly in the neonatal period, and all showed delayed development with intellectual disability, ranging from borderline/mild to severe, and speech delay. Expressive language was more severely affected than receptive language, and 4 patients (11%) were nonverbal. About half of patients had seizures that were usually well-controlled, and although the majority (89%) had an amiable affect, about half had neuropsychologic disorders, including hyperactivity, anxiety, autistic features, impulsivity, and depression. Structural brain abnormalities occurred in 53% of patients and mainly consisted of corpus callosum hypoplasia/aplasia, enlarged ventricles, hydrocephalus, and/or heterotopias. Musculoskeletal anomalies were present in 77% of patients, and included tracheo/laryngomalacia, pectus excavatum or carinatum, scoliosis/kyphosis, hip dislocation/dysplasia, joint hypermobility, and positional deformities of the feet. Other common abnormalities included congenital heart defects (39%), urogenital anomalies (45%), and ectodermal abnormalities (67%).
Myers et al. (2017) reviewed the seizure phenotypes of 31 patients with KDVS who had seizures, noting that seizures occur in about 50% of patients with the disorder. The mean age at seizure onset was 3.5 years (range, 4 months to 24 years). Most patients presented with focal impaired awareness and staring spells in infancy, often associated with autonomic signs, such as pallor, vomiting, and oxygen desaturation. Twenty-one patients had prolonged seizures, including status epilepticus. Nine (41%) of 22 patients had refractory seizures, but seizures could be variably controlled in the long term in other patients. EEG studies were available for 26 patients, most of which showed focal or multiform epileptiform discharges; 2 patients had spike-wave discharges with 3-4 Hz frequency. Variable structural brain abnormalities were found in all patients, and mainly included corpus callosum dysgenesis, abnormal hippocampi, and dilated ventricles. Less common MRI findings included periventricular nodular heterotopia, focal cortical dysplasia, abnormal sulcation, and abnormalities of the brainstem and cerebellum. All individuals had delayed development and intellectual disability, but the degree of cognitive impairment varied, with 6 patients mildly affected, 8 patients moderately affected, and 17 more severely affected.



IL1RAPL1
**Mental retardation, X-linked 21/34, 300143 (3), XLR**
This form of nonsyndromic X-linked mental retardation is characterized by a spectrum of cognitive neurologic impairments or disabilities ranging from moderate mental retardation to high-functioning autism. Males are typically severely affected, but some carrier females may manifest milder deficits (summary by Piton et al., 2008).
Kozak et al. (1993) reported a 3-generation Italian family in which 4 male patients had moderate mental retardation without any specific or consistent phenotypic abnormalities. One obligate female carrier had mild retardation and another 2 had normal intelligence, suggesting incomplete penetrance in females.
Piton et al. (2008) reported a family in which 3 brothers had mental retardation with variable autistic features. The 8-year-old proband had mental retardation and showed some autistic signs, but was too impaired to be formally tested. The proband's 2 brothers had a less severe cognitive phenotype: one had pervasive developmental disorder, not otherwise specified (PDDNOS), and the other had mild mental retardation with repetitive behaviors, but no other signs of autism. Their carrier mother was unaffected.
Franek et al. (2011) reported 2 unrelated families with X-linked mental retardation resulting from deletions encompassing the immunoglobulin domain of the IL1RAPL1 gene. Three affected males in the first family had low IQ and other variable features, including hypotonia (2), pectus excavatum (2), prominent jaw (2), synophrys (2), and hyperextensible joints (2). Two had behavioral abnormalities, including impulsivity, oppositional disorder, and hyperactivity. One had pigmentary skin changes. Genetic analysis identified a 635-kb deletion spanning exons 2-5 in the IL1RAPL1 gene (see 300206.0003), although exact deletion breakpoints were not mapped. In the second family, there were 5 affected males, but only 2 brothers were described in detail. Both had moderate intellectual disability and seizures. Both had prominent jaw, strabismus, and hyperextensible elbows; 1 had synophrys and the other had depression. One of the brothers carried a fragile site at Xq28 (FRAXF; 300031) (Parrish et al., 1994), and both had a deletion of exons 1-5 of the IL1RAPL1 gene, which was inherited from their unaffected mother. None of the patients reported by Franek et al. (2011) had autism.
Clinical Variability
Piton et al. (2008) reported a French Canadian girl with high functioning autism consistent with Asperger syndrome and no mental retardation who had a heterozygous de novo 7-bp deletion (1730delTACTCTT) in exon 9 of the IL1RAPL1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The truncated protein was predicted to lack part of the transmembrane domain as well as the entire cytoplasmic domain and was not found in 276 control chromosomes. Although in vitro studies in rat hippocampal cells indicated that the deletion resulted in a loss of function, transfection of the truncated mutant alone did not affect neurite outgrowth.



TNXB
**Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, classic-like, 1, 606408 (3), AR**
Classic-like Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is a connective tissue disorder characterized by hyperextensible skin, hypermobile joints, and tissue fragility (Burch et al., 1996).
For a phenotypic description of classic-type EDS, see 130000.
Burch et al. (1996) reported a 25-year-old man with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency (201910), associated with a classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (see 130000)-like phenotype, consisting of hyperextensible skin and joints, patellar chondromalacia, and easy bruising. In their full report, Burch et al. (1997) described atypical histologic findings that suggested a novel mechanism of disease in their proband: the most striking findings were abnormal elastin (130160) bodies beneath the dermal-epidermal junction, a diffuse increase in perivascular matrix, and uneven packing of the myelin sheaths of peripheral nerves.
To investigate the role of tenascins in EDS, Schalkwijk et al. (2001) screened serum samples from 151 patients with the classic, hypermobility, or vascular types of EDS for the presence of tenascin-X and tenascin-C (187380) by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The same assays were done in 75 patients with psoriasis, 93 patients with rheumatoid arthritis, and 21 healthy persons. Absence of tenascin-X from the serum was found in 5 unrelated patients, all of whom had recessive EDS and 1 of whom also had CAH. All 5 tenascin-X-deficient patients and 3 clinically affected tenascin-X-deficient sibs had hyperelastic skin and hypermobile joints, fulfilling major diagnostic criteria for classic EDS. Minor diagnostic criteria supporting the diagnosis of classic EDS in these patients and their affected sibs included easy bruising in all, velvety skin in 7, joint pain in 2, and multiple subluxations in 3. Although the findings were similar to those of classic EDS, all tenascin-X-deficient patients lacked atrophic scars, a major diagnostic criteria for classic EDS. Delayed wound healing, which is also common in classic EDS, was not present in any of these patients, although it was noted in the tenascin-X-deficient patient reported by Burch et al. (1997). However, it was possible that treatment with glucocorticoids for congenital adrenal hyperplasia in that patient may have played a role in delayed wound healing. The tenascin-X-deficient patients reported by Schalkwijk et al. (2001) also had a range of additional clinical findings not typically associated with EDS, including congenital adrenal hyperplasia, spina bifida occulta, mitral valve prolapse, stroke, gastrointestinal bleeding, and premature arteriosclerosis. It was not clear whether these additional disorders were related to tenascin-X deficiency. None of the parents of the 5 patients with tenascin-X deficiency were related, and none of the 4 parents available for study had clinical signs of EDS. The authors identified mutations in the TNX gene in all 5 patients.
Lindor and Bristow (2005) described 2 unrelated patients with complete deficiency of tenascin-X who had marked skin hyperextensibility, easy bruising, and joint laxity. Unlike classic EDS patients, they did not have atrophic scarring or poor wound healing. Significant medical problems occurring in these individuals included severe diverticular intestinal disease with ruptured diverticula, pancolonic diverticulitis, and rectal prolapse, mitral valve prolapse requiring valve replacement, and obstructive airway disease. One patient had 3 daughters, presumed heterozygotes, who had minimal clinical expression of a tenascin-X deficiency phenotype and did not meet the diagnostic criteria for EDS.
Chen et al. (2009) reported an 8-year-old 46,XX girl, born with ambiguous genitalia, bicornuate uterus, single kidney, and grade III vesicoureteral reflux, who was found to have 21-hydroxylase deficiency. Examination at 8 years of age revealed bifid uvula, single palmar crease on the left hand, normal skin, mild arachnodactyly, and hyperextensible joints with a Beighton score of 8/9. Her mother, who had a history of urethral prolapse and hiatus hernia, also had hyperextensible joints (Beighton score, 7/9), and her maternal grandfather had hyperextensible thumbs, whereas her father had a Beighton score of 0/9. Cardiac MRI revealed a quadricuspid aortic valve in the proband; her mother had mild mitral valve prolapse and trace regurgitation by transthoracic echocardiogram.
**Vesicoureteral reflux 8, 615963 (3), AD**
Gbadegesin et al. (2013) reported a large 5-generation family in which 9 individuals had radiologically confirmed vesicoureteral reflux and/or duplex collecting systems. Two affected mutation carriers who were examined showed signs of asymptomatic joint hypermobility.



RB1
**Bladder cancer, somatic, 109800 (3)**
Patients with cancer of the urinary bladder often present with multiple tumors appearing at different times and at different sites in the bladder. This observation had been attributed to a 'field defect' in the bladder that allowed the independent transformation of epithelial cells at a number of sites. Sidransky et al. (1992) tested this hypothesis with molecular genetic techniques and concluded that in fact multiple bladder tumors are of clonal origin. A number of bladder tumors can arise from the uncontrolled spread of a single transformed cell. These tumors can then grow independently with variable subsequent genetic alterations.
Dyrskjot et al. (2003) reported the identification of clinically relevant subclasses of bladder carcinoma using expression microarray analysis of 40 well-characterized bladder tumors. Gene expression profiles characterizing each stage and subtype identified their biologic properties, producing potential targets for therapy.
**Osteosarcoma, somatic, 259500 (3)**
Harmon and Morton (1966) reported osteogenic sarcoma in 4 sibs, with onset at 11, 15, 20, and 22 years. Epstein et al. (1970) observed osteogenic sarcoma in a father and daughter. See chondrosarcoma (215300).
Goorin et al. (1985) stated that 16 sets of sibs with osteosarcoma had been identified.
The demonstration of evidence of immune response (lysis of radiolabeled tumor cells by donor lymphocytes) in household contacts of patients with osteosarcoma (Levin et al., 1974) suggested that the familial aggregation may be due to a transmitted agent.
**Retinoblastoma, trilateral, 180200 (3), AD, Somatic mutation**
Retinoblastoma (RB) is an embryonic malignant neoplasm of retinal origin. It almost always presents in early childhood and is often bilateral. Spontaneous regression ('cure') occurs in some cases. The retinoblastoma gene (RB1) was the first tumor suppressor gene cloned. It is a negative regulator of the cell cycle through its ability to bind the transcription factor E2F (189971) and repress transcription of genes required for S phase (Hanahan and Weinberg, 2000).
Connolly et al. (1983) reported a 4-generation family with 3 patterns of expression of the retinoblastoma gene: frank retinoblastoma, unilateral or bilateral; retinoma; and no visible retinal pathology except for 'normal degeneration' with age. ('Paving stone degeneration' of the type observed in 2 of 3 RB carriers, aged 49 and 59, is said by Duane (1980) to occur in about 20% of the adult population.)
In a review, Balmer et al. (2006) noted that the most common presenting signs of retinoblastoma are leukocoria (a late sign) and strabismus (an early sign), but that many other ocular or general signs have been observed. Although the malignant tumor is curable with early treatment, there remains in the heritable form a major risk of second nonocular primary tumors.
Retinoma
Gallie and Phillips (1982) described benign lesions in the retina in retinoblastoma patients. The distinctive characteristics of these lesions, referred to by the authors as retinomas, included a translucent, grayish retinal mass protruding into the vitreous, 'cottage-cheese' calcification in 75%, and retinal pigment epithelial migration and proliferation in 60%. They suggested that retinomas represent not the heterozygous state postulated by the Knudson 2-stage model of carcinogenesis but rather the homozygous state occurring in differentiated cell(s). Gallie et al. (1982) suggested that retinomas represent either spontaneous regression of a retinoblastoma or a benign manifestation of the RB gene.
Trilateral Retinoblastoma
Brownstein et al. (1984) described 3 children with bilateral retinoblastoma and a morphologically similar neoplasm in the region of the pineal. They referred to this as trilateral retinoblastoma. The pineal gland has sometimes been referred to as 'the third eye.' Lueder et al. (1991) described a fourth case of pinealoma associated with bilateral retinoblastoma. The patient was one of 56 with heritable RB. Amoaku et al. (1996) reported 5 patients with trilateral retinoblastoma (including 2 previously reported), diagnosed among 146 consecutive patients with retinoblastoma in the West Midlands Health Authority Region in England between 1957 and 1994. This represented an incidence of 3%. There were 4 patients with pineoblastoma, only 1 of whom had a positive family history. The mean age at diagnosis of RB in the entire series was 6 months, whereas the patients with pineoblastoma were diagnosed at a mean age of 2 years. The tumors were not evident on the initial computed tomographic (CT) scans. One child presented with a calcified suprasellar mass 13 months before bilateral sporadic retinoblastoma was identified. Death occurred within 1 month of diagnosis of the intracranial tumor in 3 patients who received no treatment. In the other 2 patients, who were treated, death occurred at 15 months and 2 years, respectively, after diagnosis of intracranial tumor.
Kivela (1999) performed a metaanalysis of trilateral retinoblastoma by reviewing the literature systematically and contacting authors to obtain missing information. Data from 106 children were used to determine frequency and Kaplan-Meier survival curves. No sex predilection was found. Median age at diagnosis of retinoblastoma was 5 months (range, 0 to 29 months); age at diagnosis was younger among 47 children (47%) with familial retinoblastoma compared with age at diagnosis among 52 children (53%) with sporadic retinoblastoma (2 vs 6.5 months; P less than 0.0001). Trilateral retinoblastoma usually affected the second or third generation with retinoblastoma. Median time from retinoblastoma to trilateral retinoblastoma was 21 months (range, 6 months before to 141 months after); time to trilateral retinoblastoma was longer for 78 (77%) pineal tumors compared with 23 (23%) suprasellar tumors (32 vs 6.5 months; P less than 0.0001). The size and prognosis of pineal and suprasellar tumors were similar. Screening by neuroimaging improved outcome. The cure rate was improved when the tumors were at or below 15 mm at the time of detection.
Karatza et al. (2006) reported a pineal cyst simulating pineoblastoma in 11 children with retinoblastoma (2 familial and 9 sporadic).
Second Primary Tumors
The risk of osteogenic sarcoma is increased 500-fold in bilateral retinoblastoma patients, the bone malignancy being at sites removed from those exposed to radiation treatment of the eye tumor (Abramson et al., 1976). Francois (1977) concluded that there is a special predisposition to osteogenic sarcoma, both radiogenic and nonradiogenic, in retinoblastoma patients and possibly in their relatives. Matsunaga (1980) estimated that the relative risk of development of nonradiogenic osteosarcoma in persons with the retinoblastoma gene is 230. That osteosarcoma is a direct effect of the genomic change that underlies retinoblastoma is indicated by the cases of osteosarcoma without retinoblastoma but with genomic changes like those of retinoblastoma.
Chauveinc et al. (2001) reviewed retinoblastoma survivors who subsequently developed osteosarcoma. They found that osteosarcomas occurred 1.2 years earlier inside than outside the radiation field in patients who had undergone external beam irradiation. Also, the latency between radiotherapy and osteosarcoma was 1.3 years shorter inside than outside the radiation field. Bimodal distribution of latency periods was observed for osteosarcomas arising inside but not outside the radiation field: 40% occurred after a short latency, while the latency for the remaining 60% was comparable to that of osteosarcoma arising outside the radiation field. The authors suggested that different mechanisms may be involved in the radiocarcinogenesis. They hypothesized that a radiation-induced mutation of the second RB1 allele may be the cause of osteosarcomas occurring after a short delay, while other genes may be responsible for osteosarcomas occurring after a longer delay.
To understand why the RB protein is specifically targeted in osteosarcoma, Thomas et al. (2001) studied its function in osteogenesis. Loss of RB but not p107 (116957) or p130 (180203) blocked late osteoblast differentiation. RB physically interacted with the osteoblast transcription factor, CBFA1 (600211), and associated with osteoblast-specific promoters in vivo in a CBFA1-dependent fashion. Association of RB with CBFA1 and promoter sequences resulted in synergistic transactivation of an osteoblast-specific reporter. This transactivation function was lost in tumor-derived RB mutants, underscoring a potential role in tumor suppression. Thus, RB functions as a direct transcriptional coactivator promoting osteoblast differentiation, which may contribute to the targeting of RB in osteosarcoma.
Friend et al. (1987) found that the same DNA segment that they had isolated from 13q14 and showed to have attributes of the retinoblastoma gene is additionally the target of somatic mutations in mesenchymal tumors among patients having no apparent predisposition to retinoblastoma. Almost two-thirds of the secondary tumors arising in patients with retinoblastoma are mesenchymal in origin. Over 60% of the mesenchymal tumors are osteosarcomas; the soft tissue sarcomas include fibrosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, liposarcoma, and others. Friend et al. (1987) specifically demonstrated homozygous deletions of the RB1 locus in sporadic cases of leiomyosarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, and undifferentiated sarcoma in the absence of any history of retinoblastoma. Friend et al. (1988) reviewed the subject of tumor-suppressing genes in retinoblastoma and other disorders.
Henson et al. (1994) found loss of heterozygosity for the RB1 protein in 16 of 54 informative high-grade astrocytomas but not in 12 low-grade gliomas. Deletion mapping with ranking markers revealed that the retinoblastoma locus was preferentially targeted by the deletions. SSCP analysis and direct DNA sequencing demonstrated mutations in the remaining retinoblastoma allele. This evidence suggested to the authors that whereas mutation of the p53 tumor suppressor gene (191170) is an early event in the formation of many astrocytomas, mutation of the retinoblastoma gene is associated with progression of the astrocytoma into high-grade astrocytoma or glioblastoma multiforme. Previous work had demonstrated frequent loss of 9p, 10, 13q, 17p, 19q, and 22q in astrocytomas. Mutations in the RB1 gene were described.
Cance et al. (1990) found that leiomyosarcomas and other soft tissue sarcomas in which expression of the RB gene product was decreased were more aggressive than tumors in which this protein was expressed by nearly all cells.
Moll et al. (2001) evaluated the influence of age at external beam irradiation (EBRT) on the occurrence of second primary tumors (SPTs) inside and outside the irradiation field in 263 patients with hereditary retinoblastoma. They calculated cumulative incidences of SPT in 3 subgroups: irradiation before 12 months of age (early EBRT), irradiation after 12 months of age (late EBRT), and no irradiation. They found that hereditary RB conferred an increased risk of the development of SPT, especially in patients treated with EBRT before 12 months of age. However, they concluded that the presence of similar numbers of SPTs inside and outside the irradiation field suggested that irradiation was not the cause. The authors concluded that their study did not show an age effect on radiation-related risk, but rather that early EBRT is probably a marker for other risk factors of SPT.
Kivela et al. (2001) analyzed the association between retinoblastoma and sebaceous carcinoma (SC) of the eyelid to improve surveillance of RB survivors. They studied 11 children with hereditary RB who subsequently developed eyelid SC. Nine of the children developed SC within the field of radiation. All 9 had received a median of 46 Gy (range, 21-89) of EBRT at a median age of 16 months (range, 0.5-15 years of age). Their median age at SC diagnosis was 14 years (range, 8-30 years) and median interval from EBRT to SC diagnosis was 11 years (range, 5-26 years). The 2 children who had never received EBRT developed eyelid SC at ages 32 and 54 years. In this series, the cumulative probability of a 5-year survival of eyelid SC was 87%. The authors concluded that SC of the eyelid may occur in patients with hereditary RB regardless of primary treatment, especially within the EBRT field 5 to 15 years after radiotherapy.
Brantley et al. (2002) examined expression of p53 and Rb tumor suppressor pathways in uveal melanomas following plaque radiotherapy. They found that plaque radiotherapy damaged DNA, inhibited cell division, and promoted cell death. They stated that these changes might be due, at least in part, to induction of p53, which activates genes involved both in cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Their results also showed that plaque radiotherapy can cause alterations in the expression of Rb, but the authors noted that the significance of the latter finding would require further study.
Gombos et al. (2007) identified 15 retinoblastoma patients with secondary acute myelogenous leukemia (sAML; see 601626), 13 of whom developed sAML in childhood. Mean latent period from RB to AML diagnosis was 9.8 years (median, 42 months). Nine cases were of the M2 or M5 French-American-British subtypes. Twelve patients (79%) had received chemotherapy with a topoisomerase II inhibitor, and 8 (43%) had received chemotherapy with an epipodophyllotoxin. Ten children died of their leukemia. Gombos et al. (2007) questioned whether chemotherapy was a risk factor for the development of sAML in this series of patients.
**Small cell cancer of the lung, somatic, 182280 (3)**



CNTNAP2
**{Autism susceptibility 15}, 612100 (3)**
Autism, the prototypic pervasive developmental disorder (PDD), is usually apparent by 3 years of age. It is characterized by a triad of limited or absent verbal communication, a lack of reciprocal social interaction or responsiveness, and restricted, stereotypic, and ritualized patterns of interests and behavior (Bailey et al., 1996; Risch et al., 1999). 'Autism spectrum disorder,' sometimes referred to as ASD, is a broader phenotype encompassing the less severe disorders Asperger syndrome (see ASPG1; 608638) and pervasive developmental disorder, not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS). 'Broad autism phenotype' includes individuals with some symptoms of autism, but who do not meet the full criteria for autism or other disorders. Mental retardation coexists in approximately two-thirds of individuals with ASD, except for Asperger syndrome, in which mental retardation is conspicuously absent (Jones et al., 2008). Genetic studies in autism often include family members with these less stringent diagnoses (Schellenberg et al., 2006).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of autism, see 209850.
**Pitt-Hopkins like syndrome 1, 610042 (3), AR**
PTHSL1 is an autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by delayed psychomotor development, intellectual disability, severe speech impairment or regression, and behavioral abnormalities. Most patients have onset of seizures within the first years of life. Some patients may have cortical dysplasia on brain imaging (summary by Smogavec et al., 2016).
Strauss et al. (2006) described a clinical and neuropathologic phenotype, which they called cortical dysplasia-focal epilepsy syndrome (CDFES), in 9 children in the Old Order Amish of Lancaster, Pennsylvania. During infancy, all patients had mild gross motor delay and subtle limitations in motor skills. Eight of 9 children had good language comprehension and general development by age 18 months. There were no distinguishing physical features, and growth trajectories were normal, although all patients had relatively large heads and diminished or absent deep-tendon reflexes. Severe intractable seizures began between 2 and 7 years of age and were associated with deterioration of learning ability and social behavior. Those older than 3 years had language regression, aberrant social interactions, and mental retardation, and showed hyperactivity, inattention, and aggression. Brain MRI showed focal malformations in 3 of 7 patients studied: 2 had unilateral dysplasia of the anterior temporal lobe and 1 had a malformation of the left striatum. Resective surgery did not prevent the recurrence of seizures. The long-term outcome was poor, with patients fully dependent on others for daily living.
Pitt-Hopkins-Like Syndrome 1
Orrico et al. (2001) described 2 sibs, a brother and sister, with severe mental retardation and multiple congenital anomalies including coarse facial features, short stature, seizures, hypertrichosis, short great toes, and overbreathing. The authors stated that comparison of these patients with previous reports suggested that they could represent the first familial cases of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS; 610954). Peippo et al. (2006) noted that the clinical features of the sibs described by Orrico et al. (2001) differed in several respects from those of other PTHS patients described in the literature. The noses were merely large as opposed to beaked with flared nostrils; upper lips lacked the typical curving; both sibs had unilateral ptosis not found in other patients; and motor development was normal. Breathing abnormality also differed, with loss of consciousness in the elder sib during apnea, and breathing irregularity without apnea in the younger sib. In a follow-up of the 2 sibs reported by Orrico et al. (2001), Zweier et al. (2009) stated that the patients had normal growth apart from short stature, lack of speech development, and no specific facial dysmorphism aside from thick lips and wide mouth. Seizure onset was around 2 years of age, and 1 patient had cerebellar hypoplasia. Autistic features were not noted.
Zweier et al. (2009) also reported an 11-year-old girl with normal growth, severe mental retardation, lack of speech development, and onset of seizures at 4 to 8 months of age. She had hyperbreathing and showed stereotypic behaviors, such as teeth grinding, as well as autistic behavior. She was considered normal until age 8 months and thereafter showed developmental regression. Brain MRI results were not known. Zweier et al. (2009) noted that this patient had a similar phenotype to that reported by Orrico et al. (2001).
Smogavec et al. (2016) reported 8 patients from 6 unrelated families with moderate to severe intellectual disability with speech impairment, behavioral abnormalities, and early-onset seizures. The patients were ascertained from different genetics or pediatric neurology centers worldwide, and ranged from 2 to 47 years of age. Most had very poor or absent speech with few words and poor verbal comprehension, and several patients had loss of verbal skills or stagnation of language development. The patients had delayed walking between 18 and 5 years; 1 patient was nonambulatory at age 14. Seizure types included complex focal, focal tonic, temporal, and generalized, with EEG showing focal seizures as well as generalized slowing. Most patients had a favorable response to antiepileptic medication. Brain imaging showed suspected temporal cortical dysplasia in 2 patients and vermian atrophy in another, but MRI was normal in 3. Other variable neurologic abnormalities included hyporeflexia, hypotonia, ataxia, and spasticity. Behavioral anomalies included stereotypic hand movements, aggressivity, autoaggressivity, and reduced eye contact. One patient had hyperventilation. There were no significant or common facial dysmorphic features. Of note, 2 adult brothers had variable severity: 1 had severe intellectual disability and was nonverbal at age 47, whereas the other had moderate intellectual disability with basic literacy skills and could speak at age 40.



NALCN
**Congenital contractures of the limbs and face, hypotonia, and developmental delay, 616266 (3), AD**
CLIFAHDD is a congenital disorder characterized by congenital contractures of the limbs and face, resulting in characteristic facial features, hypotonia, and variable degrees of developmental delay. All reported cases have occurred de novo (summary by Chong et al., 2015).
Chong et al. (2015) reported 14 unrelated children with a similar congenital disorder characterized by severe contractures of the limbs, abnormal facial features, hypotonia, and variable degrees of developmental delay. Characteristic facial features included downslanting palpebral fissures, broad nasal bridge, anteverted nasal tip, large nares, short columella, long philtrum, micrognathia, pursed lips, H-shaped chin dimpling, deep nasolabial folds, and full cheeks. Limb deformities included camptodactyly, adducted thumbs, ulnar deviation, positional foot deformities ranging from varus deformity to severe clubfoot, and contractures of the elbows and knees. Patients also had short neck, scoliosis, and hip contractures. Many patients had neonatal respiratory distress and abnormal breathing patterns. All patients had global developmental delay with poor speech, and some had seizure-like activity. Brain MRI in some patients was normal, whereas others had cerebellar and/or cerebral atrophy. More variable features included gastroesophageal reflux and inguinal or umbilical hernia.
**Hypotonia, infantile, with psychomotor retardation and characteristic facies 1, 615419 (3), AR**
Infantile hypotonia with psychomotor retardation and characteristic facies (IHPRF) is a severe autosomal recessive neurologic disorder with onset at birth or in early infancy. Affected individuals show very poor, if any, normal cognitive development. Some patients are never learn to sit or walk independently (summary by Al-Sayed et al., 2013).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Infantile Hypotonia with Psychomotor Retardation and Characteristic Facies
See also IHPRF2 (616801), caused by mutation in the UNC80 gene (612636) on chromosome 2q34; and IHPRF3 (616900), caused by mutation in the TBCK gene (616899) on chromosome 4q24.
Seven et al. (2002) described a Turkish brother and sister, offspring of a first-cousin marriage, who were affected with severe neurodegeneration beginning in infancy. Both developed normally until about 6 months of age, and thereafter showed severe psychomotor regression and poor postnatal growth with microcephaly. They had lack of head control, inability to sit or walk, and no eye-to-eye contact or sense of vision or speech. Additional neurologic features included truncal hypotonia, widespread muscle atrophy, spastic tetraparesis with hyperreflexia, nystagmus, and optic atrophy. Facial dysmorphism was notable, with prominent forehead, strabismus, small nose, wide mouth (in the boy), micrognathia, and large, low-set ears. Both also had pectus carinatum and pes varus. One patient had a normal brain MRI at age 3 years, whereas the other showed cerebellar atrophy at age 5. EMG showed decreased motor nerve conduction velocities. Electron microscopy of sural nerve biopsy from 1 patient showed unmyelinated axons, spheroid formation, and edema, consistent with a clinical diagnosis of infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy. Seven et al. (2002) suggested that facial dysmorphism could permit diagnosis in the first months of life without any clinical or neurologic signs.
Koroglu et al. (2013) provided follow-up of the family reported by Seven et al. (2002). The patients were 21 and 18 years of age. Anthropomorphic measures later in childhood and as young adults showed severe growth impairment and microcephaly (-4 SD). Additional features included seizures and contractures. One of the patients had miscellaneous features, such as scoliosis and cryptorchidism.
Al-Sayed et al. (2013) reported 6 patients from 2 consanguineous Saudi Arabian families with IHPRF. The 3 patients in 1 family presented at birth with severe neonatal hypotonia and feeding difficulties, followed by severe psychomotor retardation with lack of speech development. None of the children could sit without support at 4 to 7 years of age. Other features included severe constipation, gastroesophageal reflux, and initial failure to thrive. One patient had white matter abnormalities on brain MRI; muscle biopsy of 1 patient was normal. The 3 patients in the second family had the same features, but were less severely affected. At ages 9 to 17 years, these patients were able to walk independently since 2 to 3 years of age, and they could speak a few words; IQ measured in the forties. All 3 members of this family had constipation, hyperactivity, and controlled seizures. Dysmorphic facial features present in all patients from both families included brachycephaly, broad forehead, triangular face, smooth philtrum, prominent slender nose, and thin upper lip. Patients in 1 family had large low-set ears. Sural nerve biopsies were not performed.



GHR
**Increased responsiveness to growth hormone, 604271 (3), AD**
**{Hypercholesterolemia, familial, modifier of}, 143890 (3), AD**
Familial hypercholesterolemia is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by elevation of serum cholesterol bound to low density lipoprotein (LDL), which promotes deposition of cholesterol in the skin (xanthelasma), tendons (xanthomas), and coronary arteries (atherosclerosis). The disorder occurs in 2 clinical forms: homozygous and heterozygous (Hobbs et al., 1992).
The FHCL1 phenotype can be modified by mutation in other genes. For example, in individuals with the LDLR mutation IVS14+1G-A (606945.0063), the phenotype can be altered by a SNP in the APOA2 gene (107670.0002), a SNP in the EPHX2 gene (132811.0001), or a SNP in the GHR gene (600946.0028).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Familial Hypercholesterolemia
Other forms of monogenic familial hypercholesterolemia include FHCL2 (144010), caused by mutation in the APOB gene (107730); FHCL3 (603776), caused by mutation in the PCSK9 gene (607786); and FHCL4 (603813), caused by mutation in the LDLRAP1 gene (605747).
Individuals with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia develop tendinous xanthomas, corneal arcus, and coronary artery disease; the last usually becomes evident in the fourth or fifth decade. Homozygous individuals have a more severe clinical picture with earlier presentation, usually in the first 2 decades of life (Hobbs et al., 1992).
The ranges of serum cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol are, in mg per dl, 250-450 and 200-400 in heterozygotes, greater than 500 and greater than 450 in homozygous affecteds, and 150-250 and 75-175 in homozygous unaffecteds, with some positive correlation with age (Khachadurian, 1964; Kwiterovich et al., 1974).
In homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, the aortic root is prone to develop atherosclerotic plaque at an early age. Such plaques can accumulate in unusual sites, such as the ascending aorta and around the coronary ostia. Summers et al. (1998) evaluated the aortic root using MRI imaging in a blinded, prospective study of 17 homozygous FH patients and 12 healthy controls. When patient age and body mass index were taken into account, 53% of patients with homozygous FH had increased aortic wall thickness compared to controls; this was thought to result from a combination of medial hyperplasia and plaque formation. Supravalvular aortic stenosis was seen in 41% of patients.
Houlston et al. (1988) studied the relationship of lipoprotein(a) (152200) levels and coronary heart disease in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia. Individuals with coronary artery disease had a significantly higher mean lipoprotein(a) concentration than those without coronary heart disease, suggesting that lipoprotein(a) measurements may help predict the risk of coronary heart disease in individuals with familial hypercholesterolemia.
Deramo et al. (2003) investigated the relationship between nonarteritic ischemic optic neuropathy (NAION; 258660) and serum lipid levels in 37 consecutive patients diagnosed with NAION at or below age 50 years and 74 age- and gender-matched controls. They found that hypercholesterolemia was a risk factor in these patients and suggested that NAION might be the first manifestation of a previously unrecognized lipid disorder. The patients had experienced a focal, microvascular central nervous system ischemic event at a relatively young age. Deramo et al. (2003) suggested that aggressive treatment of lipid abnormalities might be warranted in these patients.
**Laron dwarfism, 262500 (3), AR**
Laron syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by marked short stature that results from failure to generate insulin-like growth factor I (IGF1; 147440) in response to growth hormone (GH; 139250). GH levels are normal or increased. The disorder is caused by dysfunction of the growth hormone receptor.
A Laron syndrome-like phenotype associated with immunodeficiency (245590) is caused by a postreceptor defect, i.e., mutation in the STAT5B gene (604260).
Patients with mutations in the GHR gene that cause only partial insensitivity to growth hormone have a form of short stature (604271).
Dysfunction of GHR is characterized by clinical hyposomatotropism manifest by short stature, delayed bone age, and occasionally blue sclerae and hip degeneration. Additional features include delayed bone maturation and the absence of bone dysplasias and chronic diseases. Laron syndrome patients have low IGF1 despite normal or increased levels of GH. The GH is functionally normal by the criteria that it reacts normally with a variety of antisera and binds normally to GH receptors. IGF1 is low in GHIS, and exogenous GH does not induce an IGF1 response or restore normal growth. Plasma levels of GH-binding proteins (GHBP), which are derived from the extracellular domain of GHR, are often low. Cultured fibroblasts from patients with Laron dwarfism respond normally to serum growth factors (Cogan and Phillips, 2001).
Pertzelan et al. (1968) described a form of dwarfism in which the abnormality of pituitary hormones is limited to GH, but the level of GH as measured by the immunoassay method is high rather than low. In Israel, all cases (13 females, 7 males) of this type were in Oriental Jews. Laron (1974) listed a number of non-Jewish cases. Several of them were of Dutch or Arab extraction. Inheritance was clearly autosomal recessive. Similarly, Merimee et al. (1968) reported a 30-year-old man who had increased levels of plasma GH that were not suppressed by hyperglycemia and were further augmented by insulin-induced hypoglycemia and by arginine infusion. With respect to all metabolic indices examined, he showed attenuated responses to exogenous GH. Similarities to cases of isolated growth hormone deficiency (IGHD) type I (see 262400) were exaggerated hypoglycemic response to exogenous insulin and insulinopenia after glucose or arginine. Also, Saldanha and Toledo (1981) reported 2 brothers who had apparent severe IGHD but high serum GH levels. These were born to first-cousin parents of possible Italian extraction.
In an inbred population of Spanish extraction in the province of Loja in southern Ecuador, Rosenbloom et al. (1990) studied 20 patients (2 to 49 years of age) with the clinical features of Laron syndrome. Seventeen patients were members of 2 large pedigrees; among 13 affected sibships there were 19 affected and 24 unaffected female sibs and 1 affected and 21 unaffected male sibs. The height of the patients ranged from 6.7 to 10.0 standard deviation (SD) below the normal mean height for age in the United States. In addition to the previously described features, 15 patients had limited elbow extensibility, all had blue sclerae, affected adults had relatively short limbs, and all 4 affected women over 30 years of age had hip degeneration. Acrohypoplasia, defined as hand or foot length below the tenth percentile for height, was noted in 80% of the patients. A high-pitched voice was present in both children and adults. The timing of menarche was moderately to markedly delayed in 5 of 12 women more than 16 years old. Basal serum concentrations of GH were elevated in all affected children and normal to moderately elevated in the adults. The serum level of GHBP ranged from 1 to 30% of normal. Reporting further on this Ecuadorian form of Laron syndrome, Guevara-Aguirre et al. (1991) described 47 patients; approximately 60 cases had been reported worldwide before 1990, half of them from Israel. Guevara-Aguirre et al. (1991) emphasized the occurrence of markedly advanced osseous maturation for height and age; normal body proportions in childhood but childlike proportions in adults; disproportionately greater deviation of stature than head size, giving an appearance of large cranium and small facies; blue sclerae; and limited elbow extension. Unlike the other large group of patients reported from Israel, the Ecuadorian patients were of normal or superior intelligence. Although phenotypically identical, the Ecuadorian patients from Loja province had a markedly skewed sex ratio (19 females:2 males) while those from the El Oro province had a normal sex distribution (14 females:12 males).
Rosenbloom et al. (1999) reviewed the clinical, endocrine, and molecular findings of affected members of this kindred in great detail. They noted that the kindred was descended from 'conversos,' Spanish Jews who became Catholic during the Inquisition.
Schaefer et al. (1994) used computerized image analysis to perform facial morphometrics on patients with Laron syndrome from Ecuador. Morphometrics were compared for 49 patients, 70 unaffected relatives, and 14 unrelated persons. Patients with growth hormone receptor deficiency showed significant decreases in measures of vertical facial growth as compared to unaffected relatives and unrelated persons with short stature from other causes. The findings validated and quantified the clinical impression of foreshortened facies in Laron syndrome.
Buchanan et al. (1991) described anomalous findings in a family from northern India in which 3 sisters had the phenotype of Laron syndrome. All members of the family had high-affinity serum GHBP activity similar in size, circulating levels, and apparent affinity for GH to that of normal subjects. The parents were not known to be consanguineous. Buchanan et al. (1991) concluded that some novel biochemical defect must be responsible for GH-resistance and reduced production of IGF1 in this family.
Goddard et al. (1995) broadened the phenotype of GHIS by demonstrating mutations in the GHR gene (600946.0006, 600946.0007, 600946.0008) in 4 of 14 children with idiopathic short stature selected on the basis of normal growth hormone secretion and low serum concentrations of GH-binding protein. Most children with idiopathic short stature respond to recombinant growth hormone treatment with increases in their growth rates (Hopwood et al., 1993). The report of Goddard et al. (1995) raised the question of whether mutations in the genes for IGF1 (147440), IGF-binding protein-3 (146732), or IGF1R may be involved in some cases of idiopathic short stature.
Woods et al. (1997) examined the phenotypic and biochemical features of 82 GHIS patients from 23 countries. There were 45 males and 37 females (mean age, 8.25 years; mean height, -6.09 SD score; and mean insulin-like growth factor binding protein-3 (IGFBP3; 146732) value, -7.99 SD score). Of these, 63 were GHBP negative and 19 were GHBP positive (greater than 10% binding). The mean heights of GHBP-negative and -positive subjects were -6.5 and -4.9 SD scores (P less than 0.001), respectively. Clinical and biochemical heterogeneity was seen in the wide range of height (-2.2 to -10.4 SD score) and IGFBP3 (-1.4 to -14.7 SD score) values, which were positively correlated (r(2) = 0.45; P less than 0.001). This contrasted with the lack of correlation between mean parental height SD score and height SD score (r(2) = 0.01). Fifteen different GHR mutations were identified in 27 patients. These mutations included 5 nonsense, 2 frameshift, 4 splice, and 4 missense. All patients except 1, a compound heterozygote, were homozygous. There was no relationship between mutation type or exon of the GHR gene involved and height or IGFBP3 SD score. Woods et al. (1997) concluded that GHIS is associated with wide variation in the severity of clinical and biochemical phenotypes. Since this variation cannot clearly be accounted for by defects in the GHR gene, they proposed that other genetic and/or environmental factors contribute to the GHIS phenotype.
Ayling et al. (1997) described a 'new' category of congenital GHIS inherited as an autosomal dominant and caused by a dominant-negative mutation of the growth hormone receptor. There was no evidence of the phenotype usually associated with congenital GHIS (midfacial hypoplasia, blue sclera, limited elbow extension, sparse hair in childhood, or truncal adiposity). The patients studied were a mother and daughter. Sequencing of all GHR coding exons revealed a G-to-C transversion at position -1 of the splice acceptor site of intron 8 (600946.0015). The abnormality was not detected in the maternal grandparents, indicating a de novo mutation in the proband's mother. A signal peptide and extracellular sequence of the GHR gene are encoded by exons 2 to 7 and the transmembrane domain by most of exon 8. The intracellular sequence is encoded by a small part of exon 8, together with exons 9 and 10. RT-PCR with primers located in exons 8 and 10 produced 2 bands of approximately 290 and 220 bp, suggesting that the mutation caused deletion of exon 9. This was confirmed by sequencing. The predicted consequence of the exon skipping was a frameshift resulting in a premature stop codon so that the cytoplasmic sequence of the mutant GHR would be reduced to only 7 amino acids. The GHR belongs to the cytokine superfamily of receptors that depend on JAK tyrosine kinases (see 147795) for activation of STATs (see 600555) and other signaling pathways. Association of JAK2 (147796) with the GHR requires a conserved proline-rich sequence encoded by exon 9, which is located in the cytoplasmic domain. Cotransfection of the mutant and wildtype GHR together with a reporter gene containing STAT5 (601511) binding sites showed that the mutant GHR was unable to activate STAT5. More importantly, the truncated receptor exerted a marked dominant-negative effect on GHR. Ayling et al. (1997) noted that ligand-induced dimerization of GHR is essential for signal transduction, and immunoprecipitation after cotransfecting cells with both forms of GHR showed that the wildtype and mutant forms heterodimerize. A specific cytoplasmic residue is necessary for internalization and degradation of the receptor, and this process is also dependent on ubiquitination of the cytoplasmic domain. Lacking these sequences, the mutant receptors would be expected to accumulate at the cell surface, reinforcing their dominant-negative effect. Overexpression of the mutant allele was also observed and appeared to contribute to the dominant-negative effect. Most previously identified mutations had been located in the extracellular hormone-binding domain of GHR, with consequent decrease in serum GH-binding protein (which is derived from this region of the receptor). The heterozygous mutations found by Goddard et al. (1995) as an apparent contributing factor to the problem in children with 'idiopathic' short stature and low GHBP were also located in the extracellular domain. An important implication of the study by Ayling et al. (1997) was that dominant GHR mutations should be sought in children who would not previously have been thought to have endocrinopathy, namely those with familial short stature and normal GHBP.



ROR2
**Brachydactyly, type B1, 113000 (3), AD**
Type B1 brachydactyly (BDB1) is the most severe type of human brachydactyly, and shows high penetrance and variable expressivity. Hypoplastic or absent distal phalanges and nails of digits 2 through 5 in the hands and feet are cardinal phenotypic features of BDB1. The middle phalanges of digits 2 through 5 are usually short and may form a bony fusion with the corresponding hypoplastic distal phalanges. The deformed thumbs are often flat, broad, or bifid. A rarer feature of BDB1 is cutaneous syndactyly affecting both fingers and toes (summary by Lv et al., 2009).
Involvement of the distal phalanges and the association of nail aplasia distinguishes type B brachydactyly, which is said (Gong et al., 1999) to have been the first of the heritable brachydactylies to be described in the medical literature (Kellie, 1808). In this form, as in the 4 A types, the middle phalanges are short but in addition the terminal phalanges are rudimentary or absent. Both fingers and toes are affected. The thumbs and big toes are usually deformed. This type of hand malformation presents the severest deformity in the brachydactyly group. Symphalangism is also a feature. There is also mild syndactyly between the digits, leading some authors to describe this deformity as symbrachydactyly. Syndactyly in the feet usually involves the second and third toes. MacKinder (1857) described this hand deformity in 6 generations. MacArthur and McCullough (1932) described the same deformity in 3 generations and preferred the term 'apical dystrophy.' Goeminne et al. (1970) observed affected persons in 5 generations. Lenz (1977) made brief reference (with photographs) to peripheral defects simulating amniogenic ('constriction band') defects but distinct from those and from type B brachydactyly. Five persons in 4 generations were affected. Failing penetrance was observed in 2 persons.
Lv et al. (2009) reported a large Chinese family in which multiple individuals had a severe form of type B brachydactyly showing autosomal dominant inheritance. Five affected individuals were studied in detail. The proband had hypoplastic distal phalanges of digits 2 through 5 of the hands and feet, and marked hypoplasia of the third toes. The 4 other affected individuals had bilateral syndactyly, marked hypoplastic distal phalanges and absent nails of fingers 2 and 5, and flat and broad thumbs. Three individuals had cutaneous syndactyly of fingers 3 and 4, 2 of whom also had toe syndactyly. Radiographic examination of the proband showed bifid distal phalanges of the thumbs, hypoplastic distal phalanges of fingers 2 and 4, with distal symphalangism of finger 2 and 3, absent distal phalanges of finger 5 and biphalangeal toes. Lv et al. (2009) commented on the unusual cutaneous syndactyly phenotype in this family. Genetic analysis identified a heterozygous mutation in the ROR2 gene (2243delC; 602337.0014).
**Robinow syndrome, autosomal recessive, 268310 (3), AR**
Autosomal recessive Robinow syndrome-1 is a severe skeletal dysplasia characterized by dysmorphic facial features, including frontal bossing, hypertelorism, and broad nose, short-limbed dwarfism, vertebral segmentation, and genital hypoplasia (summary by van Bokhoven et al., 2000).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Robinow Syndrome
Autosomal recessive Robinow syndrome-2 (RRS2; 618529) is caused by mutation in the NXN gene (612895) on chromosome 17p13.
See also autosomal dominant Robinow syndrome-1 (DRS1; 180700), caused by mutation in the WNT5A gene (164975) on chromosome 3p; DRS2 (616331), caused by mutation in the DVL1 gene (601365) on chromosome 1p36; and DRS3 (616894), caused by mutation in the DVL3 gene (601368) on chromosome 3q27.
A recessive form of Robinow syndrome was suggested by the reports of Wadia (1978, 1979) and Wadlington et al. (1973). Features common in both the dominant (180700) and recessive forms are the characteristic facial features, orodental abnormalities, and hypoplastic genitalia. Bain et al. (1986) suggested that the main discriminating feature is the occurrence of multiple rib and vertebral anomalies in the recessive form. Robinow (1987) suggested that the term COVESDEM syndrome be removed from the literature to avoid confusion of terminology. He suggested that the cases so designated represent a recessive form of Robinow syndrome.
Glaser et al. (1989) described Robinow syndrome in a child of a consanguineous Turkish couple. In addition to the 'fetal face' and mesomelic dwarfism of Robinow syndrome, the infant showed severe abnormalities of the vertebral column. Glaser et al. (1989) suggested that such changes in the vertebral column are particularly characteristic of the recessive form of Robinow syndrome. In 2 sibships related as first cousins and both with consanguineous parents, Teebi (1990) observed the features of autosomal recessive Robinow syndrome: short stature, mesomelic and acromelic brachymelia, characteristic face with hypertelorism, wide palpebral fissures, midface hypoplasia and large mouth, and hypogenitalism. Nazer et al. (1990) reported 2 children, offspring of first-cousin Saudi parents, with the 'fetal face syndrome.' Both of the children also had the Crigler-Najjar syndrome, as did 2 previously born sibs who did not have the fetal face syndrome. Schorderet et al. (1992) described a brother and sister with Robinow syndrome in a Kurdish family from Turkey. The daughter had short stature, macrocephaly, hypertelorism, hepatosplenomegaly, short forearms, and marked vertebral anomalies. Her brother had hypertelorism, hypertrophied alveolar ridges, hepatosplenomegaly, short forearms, a rib anomaly, and ambiguous genitalia. The brother was mosaic for a Y-chromosome abnormality.
Balci et al. (1991) reported 14 patients, all but 1 of whom were the offspring of consanguineous marriages, and Robinow (1991) quoted Baxova of Bratislava, Czechoslovakia, as suggesting that the condition is not rare in Czechoslovakia, where all cases occurred in the offspring of consanguineous gypsy parents (see Baxova et al., 1989). Robinow (1991) also had reports of recessive cases from Saudi Arabia and Kuwait. In addition, he pointed out that some cases thought to be of the dominant variety are probably cases of omodysplasia of Maroteaux (164745), including the 2 patients reported by Bain et al. (1986).
Balci et al. (1998) described a 14-year-old girl in whom the diagnosis of Robinow syndrome had been made at the age of 2 months by Balci et al. (1993) on the basis of fetal face, gingival hyperplasia, mesomelic shortness, hemivertebrae between T10 and L2 with scoliosis, and an extra hypoplastic right middle finger. Intravenous pyelogram showed calyectasia. At the age of 14 years, she had a history of recurrent severe abdominal pain for the previous 6 months. She had not yet experienced menarche. Hematocolpos related to vaginal atresia was discovered. She underwent vaginoplasty with cervical construction. Vaginal atresia with cervical agenesis had apparently not been observed previously in Robinow syndrome. This was thought to represent a recessive form of Robinow syndrome.
Aksit et al. (1997) reported 4 unrelated cases of Robinow syndrome, all with cardinal features of the condition, including vertebral and costal anomalies. In addition, 1 patient showed extensive webbing of the toes and an epigastric hernia. In 2 cases there was parental consanguinity. Sabry et al. (1997) reported 2 unrelated consanguineous families with Robinow syndrome. In a child of a Kuwaiti family, they reported associated intrauterine growth retardation; laxity of ligaments, joints, and skin; severe normocytic anemia; and repeated infection associated with increased total T cells and an increased CD4:CD8 ratio. In a child of a Pakistani family, there was associated congenital heart disease with right atrial isomerism, atrial and ventricular septal defects, double outlet right ventricle, and pulmonary stenosis.
Soliman et al. (1998) outlined the characteristics of recessive Robinow syndrome as follows: short stature, mesomelic and acromelic brachymelia, thick, abnormally modeled radius and ulna, characteristic face (with hypertelorism, wide palpebral fissures, broad-based nose, everted nares), large mouth, gum hypertrophy with irregular and crowded teeth, costovertebral anomalies, and micropenis in males. Endocrine dysfunction has also been observed. All children with the syndrome have been found to have empty sella. There is also partial insensitivity of Leydig cells to human chorionic gonadotropin (see 118860), low basal testosterone in prepubertal boys, and a defective sex-steroid feedback mechanism (Soliman et al., 1998).
Aksit et al. (1997) noted that of the 80 cases of Robinow syndrome reported to that time, 19 were born to Turkish couples, as were the 4 cases they reported.
Mazzeu et al. (2007) reported detailed clinical features of 37 and 51 patients with recessive and dominant Robinow syndrome, respectively. More than 75% of patients with either form had hypertelorism, large nasal bridge, short, upturned nose, midface hypoplasia, mesomelic limb shortening, brachydactyly, clinodactyly, micropenis, and short stature. Hemivertebrae and scoliosis were present in more than 75% of patients with the recessive form, but in less than 25% with the dominant form. Umbilical hernia (32%) and supernumerary teeth (10%) were found exclusively in patients with the dominant form.
Beiraghi et al. (2011) compared the craniofacial and intraoral phenotypes of 9 patients with dominant Robinow syndrome to 3 patients with recessive Robinow syndrome. Although there was overlap, particularly with regard to the most prevalent features such as hypertelorism, short, wide nose, and anteverted naries, the craniofacial dysmorphology was more severe in patients with the recessive disorder. In contrast, intraoral features were more severe in patients with the dominant disorder, and included wide retromolar ridge, alveolar ridge deformation, malocclusion, gingival enlargement, dental crowding, and hypodontia. In both types, facial characteristics became less pronounced in older individuals. Beiraghi et al. (2011) suggested that the differential diagnosis may be enhanced by noting differences in the alveolar ridge deformation pattern and severity of other intraoral characteristics.



TRAPPC9
**Mental retardation, autosomal recessive 13, 613192 (3), AR**
Mochida et al. (2009) reported a consanguineous Israeli Arab pedigree in which 3 girls had moderate to severe mental retardation and postnatal microcephaly. One girl, at age 7 years 10 months, had severe cognitive delay and could speak only a few words. She had normal motor development and could walk, but showed bruxism and hand-flapping movements. Brain MRI scans at age 2 and 4 years showed a thin corpus callosum and reduced volume of the cerebral white matter. Brain MRI of her 4-year-old affected sister also showed a thin but fully formed corpus callosum, decreased volume of the cerebral white matter, and hypoplasia of the inferior cerebellar vermis. Brain MRI was not reported for the third child. None of the patients had dysmorphic features, autistic features, or seizures, and there was no evidence of developmental regression.
Philippe et al. (2009) reported 3 brothers, born of consanguineous Tunisian parents, with autosomal recessive mental retardation associated with mild microcephaly, myelination defect, and truncal obesity in the first year of life. One child, first examined at age 10 years, had severe mental retardation with significant speech delay and a friendly personality. He had mild microcephaly, truncal obesity, hypertelorism, short neck, and prominent upper central incisors. Examination at age 19 showed progressive microcephaly and short, smooth philtrum, and brain MRI showed unusual white matter abnormalities. The second child had unilateral cleft lip, delayed speech, hypotelorism, short neck, prominent upper central incisors, short, smooth philtrum, and long, thin fingers. He understood simple commands and had a happy disposition and hyperactivity. The third affected child had global developmental delay, but was less severely affected. At age 4, he could communicate verbally with a few words and understood commands, and was able to performed simple tasks. He also had hyperactive behavior.
Mir et al. (2009) reported a consanguineous Pakistani family with MRT13. There was either microcephaly or borderline microcephaly. Three affected individuals were studied in detail. A 3-year-old girl did not walk independently and spoke fewer than 20 meaningful words. She could not feed herself and had not achieved continence. A 6-year-old girl started walking at 4 years of age, was overweight, could not use full sentences, and had clonic/tonic seizures. A 9-year-old boy started walking at 5 years of age and could communicate basic needs. There were no autistic features or dysmorphic features.
Abou Jamra et al. (2011) reported a large consanguineous Syrian family (MR055) with MRT13. The patients had neonatal hypotonia, severe motor delay with walking between ages 5 and 7 years, single words or no speech, growth retardation, stereotypic movements, and hand flapping. They also shared some dysmorphic features, including low frontal hairline, synophrys, and microcephaly. One patient had seizures. Genetic analysis revealed a homozygous truncating mutation in the TRAPPC9 gene (611966.0001).
Marangi et al. (2013) reported 2 sisters, born of unrelated parents from southern Italy, with MRT13. Both had hypotonia at birth and showed delayed psychomotor development; 1 child never learned to stand up or utter single words. Both had a small head and a distinctive craniofacial appearance with brachycephaly, round face, hypertelorism, straight eyebrows, synophrys, wide nasal bridge, fleshy ears, and downturned mouth. One girl had recurrent febrile seizures. Both had abnormal brain MRI findings, including decreased cerebral white matter volume, sulcal enlargement, thinning of the corpus callosum, and reduced cerebellar volume. There were also several areas of T2 hyperintensity in the subcortical white matter. Both girls were obese and severely mentally disabled. One showed a friendly disposition. In a review of the literature, Marangi et al. (2013) concluded that the phenotype associated with loss-of-function mutations in the TRAPPC9 gene is recognizable and can be characterized by dysmorphic facial appearance, obesity, hypotonia, moderate to severe intellectual disability, and consistent brain abnormalities.



EYA1
**Branchiootic syndrome 1, 602588 (3), AD**
Individuals with the BO syndrome are affected by the same branchial and otic anomalies as those seen in individuals with the branchiootorenal syndrome (see BOR1, 113650), but lack renal anomalies (Vincent et al., 1997).
Although Melnick et al. (1978) maintained that the BO syndrome is distinct from the BOR syndrome because of the lack of renal anomalies and variable presence of deafness in the former, Cremers and Fikkers-van Noord (1980) suggested that the 2 syndromes represent a single entity.
See 113600 for a discussion of branchial cleft anomalies, which may be related.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Branchiootic Syndrome
See also BOS2 (120502), which maps to chromosome 1, and BOS3 (608389), which maps to 14q23 and is caused by mutations in the SIX1 gene (601205).
Fourman and Fourman (1955) described a large multigenerational family in which 17 members had preauricular pits, 12 of whom also had mild to severe sensorineural hearing loss. Among family members without preauricular pits, 3 had hearing loss: one of these individuals had a branchial pit. Some reported onset of hearing loss in childhood, whereas others had onset beginning at about age 20 years. Audiograms showed both high and low tone loss, usually high tone more than low. There was no evidence of vestibular disorder. The authors suggested that ear pits, deafness, and branchial fistulae were independent effects of a single dominant gene with incomplete penetrance.
Wildervanck (1962) reported a family in which 14 members had either deformed auricles, marginal pits, or preauricular appendages. Two had a moderate conductive deafness: bilateral in 1 and unilateral in the other. The mode of inheritance was dominant with full penetration. Wildervanck (1962) suggested this was a different syndrome from that described by Fourman and Fourman (1955). McLaurin et al. (1966) reported a kindred with branchial anomalies and associated hearing impairment similar to the kindred described by Wildervanck (1962). Brusis (1974) reported a kindred similar to the one described by Fourman and Fourman (1955).
Vincent et al. (1997) reported 2 families with the BO syndrome. Clinical features included branchial cervical fistulae, cup-shaped pinnae, preauricular pits, and sensorineural, conductive, or mixed hearing loss. There was no evidence of renal anomalies.
Spruijt et al. (2006) reported an infant with severe obstructive sleep apnea caused by laryngomalacia, pharyngomalacia, glossoptosis, and tracheobronchomalacia. He also had bilateral branchial fistulae and ear anomalies, including ear pits, simple helices, and slight cup-shaped and low-set left ear. The features suggested BO syndrome. Other findings included micro- and retrognathia, but kidneys and hearing were normal. Surgical intervention improved the upper airway obstruction, but mild delay and mental and motor development were observed at age 11 months. His mildly affected mother showed mild retrognathia, left-sided branchial neck fistula, left-sided preauricular pit, and right-sided branchial cyst in the neck. Kidney ultrasound and hearing were normal. Both mother and son were heterozygous for a truncating mutation in the EYA1 gene (601653.0015). Spruijt et al. (2006) emphasized the phenotypic variability of BO syndrome associated with EYA1 mutations.
**Branchiootorenal syndrome 1, with or without cataracts, 113650 (3), AD**
Branchiootorenal syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by sensorineural, conductive, or mixed hearing loss, structural defects of the outer, middle, and inner ear, branchial fistulas or cysts, and renal abnormalities ranging from mild hypoplasia to complete absence. Reduced penetrance and variable expressivity has been observed (Fraser et al., 1978).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Branchiootorenal Syndrome
See also BOR2 (610896), caused by mutation in the SIX5 gene (600963) on chromosome 19q13. Sanchez-Valle et al. (2010) stated that approximately 40% of patients with BOR have mutations in the EYA1 gene and 5% have mutations in the SIX5 gene.
See also branchiootic (BO) syndrome-1 (BOS1; 602588) and the otofaciocervical syndrome (OFC; 166780), allelic disorders showing overlapping phenotypes but without renal anomalies. See also 600257 for a discussion of the BOR-Duane-hydrocephalus contiguous gene syndrome as described by Vincent et al. (1994).
Although Melnick et al. (1978) maintained that the BOR syndrome is distinct from the BO syndrome because in the latter condition renal anomaly is absent and deafness is not a constant feature, Cremers and Fikkers-van Noord (1980) concluded that the 2 syndromes are in fact a single entity.
Melnick et al. (1975, 1976) described a family in which the father and 3 of 6 living children (a son and 2 daughters) had mixed hearing loss associated with a Mondini-type cochlear malformation (hypoplasia of cochlear apex shown by tomography) and stapes fixation, cup-shaped, anteverted pinnae, bilateral prehelical pits, bilateral branchial cleft fistulas, and bilateral renal dysplasia with anomalies of the collecting system. The father and affected son also had aplasia of the lacrimal ducts. A fourth child, who died at 5 months of age, was said to have had branchial cleft fistulas and bilateral polycystic kidneys. Conditions in the same nosoembryologic community were discussed. Fitch and Srolovitz (1976) reported a woman with preauricular pits, cervical fistulas, and partial deafness who gave birth to 2 children with preauricular pits and severe renal dysgenesis.
Fraser et al. (1978) reported a kindred with the BOR syndrome. Clinical features included preauricular pits, branchial fistulas, sensorineural, conductive, or mixed hearing loss, lacrimal stenosis, and malformed external ears. Radiographic studies showed hypoplastic and malformed external ear canals, ossicles, and cochlea. Radiographic studies of the urinary tract showed minor anomalies, including partially distorted pelvicalyceal systems, narrow pelviureteric junctions, and renal dysplasia. Not all features were expressed in those affected. Fraser et al. (1978) also provided a review of previously reported cases.
Carmi et al. (1983) observed a man with the BOR syndrome and crossed renal ectopia who fathered 3 children born with bilateral renal agenesis and the Potter syndrome. Preisch et al. (1985) reported affected father, son, and daughter. The father and daughter showed unilateral tearing with eating, i.e., gustatory lacrimation. Another family reportedly showed the same phenomenon. Gustatory lacrimation, sometimes described as 'crocodile tears,' was noted by Gorlin (1976) to have been observed in over 100 cases but never in multiple members of families. Most cases are unilateral and often follow facial trauma or surgery but can occur as a congenital defect in innervation.
Fraser et al. (1983) reported 2 families in which the propositi had bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, preauricular pit or tag, and duplication of the ureters or bifid renal pelvises. Other relatives had 1 or more of these anomalies in a pattern suggesting autosomal dominant inheritance with reduced penetrance and variable expressivity. Fraser et al. (1983) suggested the term 'branchiootoureteral syndrome.'
Heimler and Lieber (1986) described a large, 4-generation kindred with branchiootorenal syndrome containing 16 individuals with confirmed manifestations of the disorder. Of these, only 4 had abnormalities in all 3 systems, whereas 7 had branchial arch and/or hearing defects but no reported renal abnormalities. However, because only 1 of these individuals had undergone detailed renal evaluation, it is possible that the incidents of renal defects in this kindred was higher than reported.
Legius et al. (1990) described father and son with a branchial cleft syndrome mixing characteristics of the BOR syndrome with those of the branchiooculofacial syndrome (BOFS; 113620). The 2 subjects showed several anomalies common to both syndromes, namely, abnormally shaped ears with deafness, cervical fistulas, preauricular ear pits, and lacrimal duct stenosis. Unilateral renal hypoplasia and dysplasia in the son were typical of the BOR syndrome. On the other hand, cleft palate and mild 'mental problems' in the father, and bilateral microphthalmia and high-arched palate in the son were more characteristic of BOFS. Neither the father nor the son showed the usual findings of BOFS, such as lip 'pseudoclefts,' abnormal nose, premature graying, or skin abnormalities. The father had been operated on for arteria lusoria (left subclavian artery passing behind the esophagus) causing dysphagia. He had also had unexplained atrial fibrillation. Lin et al. (1992) concluded that the patients of Legius et al. (1990) indeed had the BOF syndrome and that this entity is distinct from the BOR syndrome. Legius and Fryns (1992) remained dubious of a distinction.
Chitayat et al. (1992) made the diagnosis of BOR syndrome in a woman who had had 2 pregnancies complicated by oligohydramnios due to renal hypoplasia and agenesis. Both babies died neonatally of pulmonary hypoplasia. Histopathology of the temporal bones of the second child showed marked immaturity of the middle ear cleft, ossicles, facial nerve and canal, and cochlear nerve. The mother's renal ultrasound study was normal although intravenous pyelography indicated renal hypoplasia. The mother had a hearing problem first recognized at age 5 when abnormality of the right ossicular mass and antral region was found. A preauricular pit on the right in the mother was pictured.
Chen et al. (1995) described 45 individuals with the BOR syndrome, highlighting differences and similarities to findings reported by others. Characteristic temporal bone findings included hypoplasia of the cochlea, which was four-fifths of normal size with only 2 turns, dilation of the vestibular aqueduct, bulbous internal auditory canals, deep posterior fossa, and acutely angled promontories. They pictured a 3-generation family with various manifestations.
Graham and Allanson (1999) described a 14-month-old girl with unilateral congenital cholesteatoma (604183) and anomalies of the facial nerve, in addition to the branchial arch, otic, and renal malformations that comprise the BOR syndrome. The mother also had the BOR syndrome and unilateral duplication of the facial nerve. This was said to be the first study of a BOR patient with congenital cholesteatoma and the second family in which cholesteatoma and anomalies of the facial nerve were described in patients with BO/BOR syndrome.
In the branchiootorenal syndrome, renal defects, which are estimated to be severe in only 6% of patients, can include collecting system duplication, hypoplasia, cystic dysplasia, hydronephrosis, and agenesis (Izzedine et al., 2004).
Olavarrieta et al. (2008) reported an unusual Spanish family in which the male proband had BOR1 syndrome, associated with a heterozygous de novo mutation in the EYA1 gene (601653.0015), and Stickler syndrome type I (STL1; 108300), associated with a heterozygous mutation in the COL2A1 gene (120140). The patient's mother and brother, both of whom had Stickler syndrome and the COL2A1 mutation, did not carry the EYA1 mutation. All 3 patients had myopia, vitreous anomaly, and flat face, characteristic of Stickler syndrome; the brothers had cleft palate. The proband also had branchial fistulas, preauricular pits, renal agenesis, and mixed hearing loss consistent with BOR1 syndrome. The brother with Stickler syndrome had conductive hearing loss due to infection and surgery. Olavarrieta et al. (2008) emphasized that both disorders show phenotypic variability as well as overlapping features, which can complicate a precise diagnosis. Thorough clinical evaluation is necessary to identify coexisting genetic syndromes in the same patient.
**?Otofaciocervical syndrome, 166780 (3), AD**
Otofaciocervical syndrome (OTFCS) is a rare disorder characterized by facial anomalies, cup-shaped low-set ears, preauricular fistulas, hearing loss, branchial defects, skeletal anomalies including vertebral defects, low-set clavicles, winged scapulae, sloping shoulders, and mild intellectual disability (summary by Pohl et al., 2013).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Otofaciocervical Syndrome
OTFCS2 (615560) is caused by mutation in the PAX1 gene (167411) on chromosome 20p11.
Otofaciocervical syndrome was described by Fara et al. (1967) in a man and 4 of his 7 children. The otologic features were conductive hearing loss and prominent auricles with large conchae and preauricular fistulas just in front of the helix. Lateral cervical fistulas were present in some. Sunken nasal root, narrow nose, and long face were striking. The neck appeared long with sloping shoulders, low-set clavicles, and winged scapulae. All showed a mild intellectual deficit. Gorlin (1982) stated that this was the only known kindred with this disorder.
Dallapiccola and Mingarelli (1995) presented a sporadic case which they suggested supports the distinctness of the otofaciocervical syndrome. Distinguishing features were a long face with narrow nose, highly arched palate, prominent and dysmorphic ears, long neck, sloping shoulders and clavicles, winged, low and laterally set scapulae, tetralogy of Fallot, and deafness secondary to cochlea malformation. Several features present in the original family, including lateral cervical fistulae, had suggested that otofaciocervical syndrome is a variant of branchiootorenal syndrome (BOR; 113650). The absence of preauricular tags, lacrimal duct stenosis, and renal malformations, and the presence of distinct facial and radiographic findings and markedly downward sloping shoulders in their patient led Dallapiccola and Mingarelli (1995) to suggest that the syndrome is a unique, clinically recognizable entity.
Rickard et al. (2001) presented evidence that the otofaciocervical syndrome is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome involving the EYA1 gene, which is the site of mutations causing the branchiootorenal syndrome. One of the 2 patients they studied had previously been reported by Rajput et al. (1999). She presented with moderate hearing loss, bilateral preauricular pits, a single lacrimal duct, a cup-shaped ear, and unilateral facial palsy. A congenital cholesteatoma was identified in her right middle ear and was treated surgically. She was of short stature and had a short neck and pronounced sloping shoulders, with limited shoulder abduction. X-rays showed lateral displaced scapulae. She had mild developmental delay. A renal ultrasound showed a small left kidney and a right kidney of normal size with a bifid pelvis. Both parents were unaffected and intellectually normal.



SLC25A24
**Fontaine progeroid syndrome, 612289 (3), AD**
Fontaine progeroid syndrome is characterized by prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, decreased subcutaneous fat tissue, sparse hair, triangular face, widely open anterior fontanel, convex and broad nasal ridge, micrognathia, craniosynostosis in some patients, and early death in many (summary by Writzl et al., 2017).
Petty et al. (1990) described what they considered to be a newly recognized form of congenital progeroid syndrome in a 5-year-old girl. They suggested that the 46-year-old woman reported by Wiedemann (1979) had the same syndrome. Common manifestations included pre- and postnatal growth retardation, markedly diminished subcutaneous fat, wrinkled skin, abnormally scant hair growth, hypoplastic distal phalanges with hypoplastic nails, umbilical hernia, large open anterior fontanel, and normal cognitive and motor development. Both patients had a prematurely aged appearance since birth. Petty et al. (1990) noted that patients with Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch syndrome (WRS; 264090) show similarities to their patient, but differ by the presence of natal teeth, large hands and feet with long, tapering digits, developmental delay, and neurologic impairment.
Rodriguez et al. (1999) reported a severe prenatal form of progeria. Marked intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) and oligohydramnios had been detected at 32 weeks' gestation by ultrasonography, and the patient was born by cesarean section at 35 weeks. She died 7 hours after birth with features including premature aging, absence of subcutaneous fat, brachydactyly, absent nipples, hypoplastic external genitalia, and abnormal ear lobes. The authors designated this case as a prenatal form of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS; 176670). However, Faivre et al. (1999) reported a similarly affected female neonate and stated that HGPS was an 'inappropriate' diagnosis for both their own patient and the patient reported by Rodriguez et al. (1999). Despite some overlap in clinical manifestations, Faivre et al. (1999) also thought it unlikely that their infant had WRS, also known as neonatal progeroid syndrome. Rodriguez and Perez-Alonso (1999) defended the 'diagnosis of progeria syndrome [as] the only one possible.'
Castori et al. (2009) described a male infant born with marked IUGR and oligohydramnios, for which he was delivered by cesarean section at 32 weeks' gestation. At birth he was cyanotic and hypotonic, with severe respiratory distress, and he died at 20 hours after birth from cardiopulmonary failure. Postmortem examination showed brachycephaly, wide anterior fontanel, hypertelorism, midface hypoplasia with depressed periorbital area, short nose with broad base and anteverted nares, and low-set ears with flattened helix. There was a generalized deficiency of subcutaneous fat, and his scalp hair showed an unusual distribution, being sparse in the parietal area bilaterally. The digits of all 4 limbs were shortened and markedly tapered with nail hypoplasia/aplasia. Abdominal muscles were severely hypoplastic and the overlying skin was mildly redundant. In addition, he had micropenis, hypoplasia of the scrotum, and bilateral cryptorchidism. X-ray showed synostotic brachycephaly due to premature fusion of the coronal sutures, universal platyspondyly with superior and inferior notching of multiple vertebral bodies, and hypoplasia/aplasia of the distal phalanx of all digits. Dissection revealed pachygyria and cerebellar hypoplasia, as well as intestinal malrotation and multiple volvuli. Noting the triad of craniosynostosis, anonychia, and extensive abdominal muscle hypoplasia in this patient, the authors concluded that the disorder was consistent with what they designated 'Fontaine-Farriaux syndrome.'
Adolphs et al. (2011) reported a 7-year-old Hungarian girl with GCMS who underwent frontofacial advancement by internal distraction for functional and psychosocial amelioration of her complex craniofacial malformation. In addition to brachycephaly with severe midface hypoplasia and retrusion, she had short eyebrows and palpebral fissures, hypertrichosis of the scalp and trunk with low frontal hairline, hyperopia, dental anomalies, and hypoplasia of the labia majora, and she was given a diagnosis of Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome. Her postoperative course was complicated by a necrotizing soft tissue infection of the scalp.
Ehmke et al. (2017) studied 5 unrelated girls, including the Hungarian girl previously reported by Adolphs et al. (2011) (patient 2), who all exhibited brachycephaly, broad forehead, depressed supraorbital ridge, midface hypoplasia, prognathia or tongue protrusion, low anterior and posterior hairlines, hypertrichosis, and wrinkled skin. Other features included large anterior fontanel, coarse scalp hair, short downslanting palpebral fissures, and low-set dysplastic ears. All had failure to thrive, and 4 of the 5 showed IUGR and postnatal short stature, with reduced subcutaneous fat tissue and dermal translucency. In addition, 4 exhibited coronal craniosynostosis, oligodontia and/or microdontia, and small nails; short distal phalanges and syndactyly were also present in 3, and 3 had conductive hearing impairment. Four had umbilical hernia, and 2 also had hypoplasia of the abdominal wall muscles. Four of the 5 patients were alive at ages 5, 5.5, 7, and 14 years, but a Turkish girl (patient 4) died at 20 months after a urinary tract infection. Two of the girls had initially been diagnosed with neonatal progeroid syndrome (WRS), but the authors stated that the 5 girls showed the typical hallmarks of GCMS.
Writzl et al. (2017) studied 2 boys and 2 girls with a progeroid appearance. The 2 girls were previously reported by Rodriguez et al. (1999) (patient 3) and Faivre et al. (1999) (patient 2), and 1 of the boys was reported by Castori et al. (2009) (patient 4). All presented with pre- and postnatal growth retardation as well as an aged appearance characterized by decreased subcutaneous fat, wrinkled skin, and prominent veins. Other features included wide fontanels, abnormal scalp hair pattern, triangular face, midface hypoplasia, convex nasal ridge, micrognathia, low-set dysplastic ears, small distal phalanges, and small nails. Umbilical hernia was present in 2 patients, and another had abdominal muscle hypoplasia. Cryptorchidism was present in both boys, and 1 also had micropenis and hypoplastic scrotum. Two patients had craniosynostosis, with premature fusion of coronal sutures in both and parietotemporal synostosis in 1. All 4 patients died within the first year of life: patients 3 and 4 from respiratory distress, at 7 hours and 20 hours after birth, respectively; patient 1 from pulmonary hypertension at age 6 months; and patient 2 from sepsis at age 7 months. For historic reasons, the authors designated the congenital progeroid disorder in these patients as Fontaine syndrome, noting that a similarly affected patient was first described by Fontaine et al. (1977); Writzl et al. (2017) also stated that the phenotype was likely to represent the same entity as that described by Petty et al. (1990).



MYT1L
**Mental retardation, autosomal dominant 39, 616521 (3), AD**
De Rocker et al. (2015) described 2 unrelated patients with MRD39. Patient 14, originally reported by de Ligt et al. (2012), was a girl who presented with neonatal hypotonia and feeding difficulties soon after birth, and was noted to have developmental delay around 6 months of age. At age 12 years, she had an IQ of about 45 and showed autistic features. Mild dysmorphic features included broad base and bridge of the nose and a large mouth. Patient 15 was a 13-year-old boy with delayed development, especially affecting language, and autism spectrum disorder. At age 9 years, his IQ was about 50. He had brachycephaly and upwardly slanted narrow eyes.
Blanchet et al. (2017) reported 9 patients with MRD39. All had developmental delay or impaired intellectual development and gross motor delay. Most (85%) were overweight/obese and 70% had hyperphagia. CNS malformation and minor anomalies were each seen in 42% of patients. Autism and epilepsy were seen in 30% and 15% of patients, respectively. The proportions with impaired intellectual development, gross motor delay, speech delay, autism, overweight/obesity, and hyperphagia among patients with MYT1L haploinsufficiency were similar to those in patients with the 2p25.3 deletion syndrome, suggesting that MTY1L haplosufficiency is responsible for the 2p25.3 deletion phenotype.
Loid et al. (2018) reported a 13-year-old boy with MRD39 with early-onset obesity. The patient was overweight at age 1 year and obese at age 2 years. He had hyperphagia, speech delay, strabismus, hyperactivity, and neurologic, cognitive, and motor delay. The patient had no dysmorphic features, and his brain MRI was normal.



DPP6
**Mental retardation, autosomal dominant 33, 616311 (3)**
Liao et al. (2013) reported a family with 4 affected members in 3 generations segregating autosomal dominant mental retardation. All 4 affected individuals had microcephaly (greater than -3 SD): a 56-year-old male with a head circumference of 51 cm, a 26-year-old female with a head circumference of 50 cm, a 29-year-old female with a head circumference of 50 cm, and a 5-year-old girl with a head circumference of 44 cm. One woman and her 5-year-old daughter were both small and thin (stature and weight -2 to -3 SD in both); an affected aunt had normal stature, and the grandfather had short stature, with a height of 163 cm. The proband had severe mental retardation and hyperactivity. The mother had microcephaly and mild mental retardation with an IQ of 65. The aunt had severe mental retardation and memory problems. The grandfather had mild mental retardation, with an IQ of 66.
**{Ventricular fibrillation, paroxysmal familial, 2}, 612956 (3), AD**
Alders et al. (2009) studied 4 families segregating idiopathic ventricular fibrillation (IVF) who came from the same area in the Netherlands and were genealogically linked through multiple lines. The proband in the first family came to medical attention because of the death of one of her brothers at age 31 in the early morning. Postmortem examination did not reveal cause of death or cardiac anomalies. Her sister died suddenly at the age of 31 at night. She had undergone complete cardiac examination that was unremarkable one month before her death. Cardiac evaluation of the proband did not reveal any abnormalities. However, 6 months after that examination she suffered ventricular fibrillation at age 44 and was successfully resuscitated. Implantation of an ICD followed and it had not discharged in the follow-up period of 2.5 years. The proband's nephew was resuscitated from ventricular fibrillation at age 16 years. He had an ICD implanted and it discharged appropriately several times over the next 2 years after his first event. The second family came to medical attention because the proband lost 2 children, 1 at the age of 37 at rest and the other at age 32 during sleep. In both cases there was no evidence of cardiac disease. The proband considered himself to be an obligate carrier because 3 sibs of his mother had died suddenly at young ages. He had complete cardiac evaluation that was unremarkable. In the third family, the proband was admitted to the hospital after resuscitation from ventricular fibrillation at the age of 33 years. His cardiac examination was normal but an ICD was implanted. During follow-up for 4 years, he had several appropriate discharges. Two sons of his great-grandmother had died suddenly at age 30.
Alders et al. (2009) identified a risk haplotype in these 3 families and in 7 other families from the Netherlands segregating IVF. They evaluated the clinical consequences of carrying the risk haplotype in a total of 155 relatives from the 10 families. Eighty-four of these individuals (54%) were identified as carriers of the risk haplotype. None of them had any echocardiographic or cardiac MRI abnormalities. All had normal EKGs. Among those individuals who were resuscitated from ventricular fibrillation, their electrophysiologic studies or ICD reports showed short-coupled isolated monomorphic extrasystoles, occasionally eliciting immediate ventricular fibrillation. Median survival in risk-haplotype carriers was 58 years (95% CI, 46-69 years). Thirty risk-haplotype carriers experienced a clinical event; 19, unexplained sudden cardiac death; and 11, resuscitated ventricular fibrillation. The youngest individual experiencing an event was 16 years of age, and the oldest was 77 years of age. The mean age at event was 36 +/- 13 years. Males were overrepresented in this group; they had 23 events, whereas there were 7 events in females.



NEB
**Nemaline myopathy 2, autosomal recessive, 256030 (3), AR**
Nemaline myopathy-2 is an autosomal recessive skeletal muscle disorder with a wide range of severity. The most common clinical presentation is early-onset (in infancy or childhood) muscle weakness predominantly affecting proximal limb muscles. Muscle biopsy shows accumulation of Z-disc and thin filament proteins into aggregates named 'nemaline bodies' or 'nemaline rods,' usually accompanied by disorganization of the muscle Z discs. The clinical and histologic spectrum of entities caused by variants in the NEB gene is a continuum, ranging in severity from the severe form with perinatal onset and fetal death to milder forms with later onset. The distribution of weakness can vary from generalized muscle weakness, more pronounced in proximal limb muscles, to distal-only involvement, although neck flexor weakness appears to be rather consistent. Histologic patterns range from a severe usually nondystrophic disturbance of the myofibrillar pattern to an almost normal pattern, with or without nemaline bodies, sometimes combined with cores (summary by Lehtokari et al., 2014).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of nemaline myopathy, see NEM3 (161800).
Mutations in the NEB gene are the most common cause of nemaline myopathy (Lehtokari et al., 2006).
Wallgren-Pettersson et al. (1999) reported 41 unrelated families with NEM2 suggested by linkage analysis. All were consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. Wallgren-Pettersson et al. (1999) noted that phenotypic classification of nemaline myopathy is difficult because the disease spectrum forms a continuum; however, the authors described 2 main forms, 'typical' and 'severe.' Typical patients had generalized hypotonia at birth, with particular involvement of the bulbar, neck flexor, and respiratory muscles. Proximal limb muscles were weaker initially, but distal limb muscle weakness eventually occurred. The extraocular muscles were spared. The facies was myopathic with a high-arched palate. The spine was hyperlordotic, sometimes rigid, and scoliosis sometimes developed at puberty. Deep tendon reflexes were decreased or absent, and the gag reflex was often absent. Chest deformities were common, but there was no cardiac involvement. Imaging showed decreased muscle density with increased fatty infiltration. Serum creatine kinase was normal or mildly elevated. Muscle biopsies characteristically showed nemaline bodies and type 1 fiber predominance. Although myopathic changes were observed, there were no dystrophic or inflammatory changes. Despite delayed motor development and waddling gait, many patients with typical disease remained ambulatory as adults. Intelligence was normal. A subset of patients had severe disease, characterized by absence of spontaneous movements or respiration at birth. These patients often had contractures or fractures at birth and usually never achieved independent sitting or ambulation.
Wallgren-Pettersson et al. (2002) reported 7 patients from 5 families with severe NEM2 confirmed by mutation in the NEB gene. Four pregnancies were complicated by polyhydramnios, and 4 patients had arthrogryposis. Most affected infants did show show spontaneous respiration or antigravity movements. Several previous infant deaths or miscarriages were reported in the families. Two affected brothers in 1 family had large fontanels, low-set ears, adducted thumbs, hypospadias, and micropenis. Another affected child had cleft palate, rocker-bottom feet, and undescended testes. Death occurred between 30 minutes and 19 months of age. Muscle biopsies showed nemaline bodies in up to 90% of muscle fibers.
Romero et al. (2009) reported a 27-year-old man with NEM2 confirmed by genetic analysis. He presented at birth with generalized hypotonia, poor spontaneous movements, and restrictive respiratory insufficiency requiring mechanical ventilation. He showed diffuse muscle weakness with axial predominance, never acquired independent ambulation, and developed multiple joint contractures. As an adult, he was quadriplegic with mild facial weakness. No cardiac symptoms were observed. Muscle biopsy showed numerous fibers with distinctive rods and well-delineated cores in type 1 fibers. Electron microscopy showed rods with characteristic striation and cores with some sarcomeric disorganization and depletion of mitochondria. The histologic findings indicated that cores, in addition to rods, may be found in patients with NEM2.
In a detailed review and update of 159 families with mutations in the nebulin gene associated with myopathies, Lehtokari et al. (2014) noted that the most common associated phenotype was nemaline myopathy (90% of families). Within this broad category, there was a range of severity. In addition, some families with NEB mutations had more diverse manifestations, including early-onset distal myopathy without nemaline bodies (4 families), a distal form of nemaline myopathy (3 families), core-rod myopathy with generalized muscle weakness (3 families), a childhood-onset distal myopathy with rods and cores (3 families), and fetal akinesia/lethal multiple pterygium syndrome (3 families).
Fetal Akinesia/Lethal Multiple Pterygia Syndrome
Yonath et al. (2012) reported 4 unrelated pregnancies with abnormal prenatal ultrasound findings in fetuses with NEM2. In each family, 1 or both of the parents was of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, and the common exon 55 deletion (161650.0007) in the NEB gene was found in the heterozygous state in the patients and in unaffected parents. A second pathogenic NEB mutation was found in 3 of the patients; a second mutation could not be identified in 1 of the patients. Prenatal ultrasound showed polyhydramnios, decreased fetal movements, clubfoot, and clenched hands. All patients showed severe hypotonia after birth, and all died within the first months of life.
Todd et al. (2015) reported twin male fetuses, conceived of consanguineous parents, with NEM2 presenting as fetal akinesia with lethal multiple pterygia syndrome. Prenatal ultrasound showed severe hydrops in both fetuses, and the pregnancy was terminated at 16 weeks' gestation. Postmortem examination showed joint contractures consistent with arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC), bilateral talipes, multiple pterygia, hypertelorism, and cystic hygromas. Muscle tissue was not obtained. A previous fetus was therapeutically aborted due to hydrops fetalis at 19 weeks' gestation.
Abdalla et al. (2017) reported 2 male fetuses, conceived of consanguineous Egyptian parents, with NEM2 presenting as fetal akinesia with lethal multiple pterygia syndrome. Both pregnancies were complicated by polyhydramnios and hydrops fetalis. Prenatal ultrasound of the second fetus at 18 weeks' gestation showed growth restriction, fetal akinesia, cystic hygroma, edema, pericardial effusion, hydrothorax, and flexion deformities. The pregnancy was terminated, and postmortem examination confirmed the findings of multiple pterygia and contractures; dysmorphic features, including hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, long philtrum, and low-set ears were also noted. Muscle biopsy was not performed.
Distal Myopathy
Wallgren-Pettersson et al. (2007) reported 7 patients from 4 unrelated Finnish families with NEM2 presenting as distal myopathy with foot drop between the first and third decades after normal early motor development. Muscle weakness predominantly affected the ankle dorsiflexors, finger extensors, and neck flexors, resulting in walking difficulties and increased falls in some patients. The patients were unable to walk on their heels. Additional variable features included high-arched palate, slight facial weakness, dysarthria, pseudohypertrophy of the calves, and mild atrophy of proximal muscles of the upper and lower limbs. Radiographic imaging showed fatty replacement of the muscles of the anterior compartment of the lower legs. None of the patients had breathing problems or dysphagia, and serum creatine kinase was not elevated. Muscle biopsy showed myopathic changes with marked fiber size variability, fibrosis, and large hypertrophic fibers with increased internal nuclei. Rare nemaline rods or bodies were observed, although these were often apparent only on electron microscopy or with special staining. The patients were initially thought to have tibial muscular dystrophy (TMD; 600334), but molecular analysis excluded that diagnosis.



SLC20A2
**Basal ganglia calcification, idiopathic, 1, 213600 (3), AD**
Familial idiopathic basal ganglia calcification is an autosomal dominant condition characterized by symmetric calcification in the basal ganglia and other brain regions. Patients with calcifications can either be asymptomatic or show a wide spectrum of neuropsychiatric symptoms, including parkinsonism, dystonia, tremor, ataxia, dementia, psychosis, seizures, and chronic headache. Serum levels of calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, and parathyroid hormone are normal. The typical age at clinical onset is between 30 and 50 years (summary by Wang et al., 2012).
Calcification of the basal ganglia is a nonspecific finding in many medical conditions, including infectious, metabolic, and genetic syndromes. In addition, calcification of the basal ganglia is observed as an incidental finding in approximately 0.7 to 1.2% of CT scans (Koller et al., 1979; Harrington et al., 1981; Forstl et al., 1992). These incidental calcifications are usually benign and have no clear etiology, especially in patients over 60 years of age (Geschwind et al., 1999). Forstl et al. (1992) found no increased risk for dementia, cerebral infarction, seizures, alcoholism, vertigo, or headache in 166 patients with calcification of the basal ganglia compared to 622 individuals without calcification.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Idiopathic Basal Ganglia Calcification
See IBGC4 (615007), caused by mutation in the PDGFRB gene (173410) on 5q32; IBGC5 (615483), caused by mutation in the PDGFB gene (190040) on 22q13; IBGC6 (616413), caused by mutation in the XPR1 gene (605237) on 1q25; IBGC7 (618317), caused by mutation in the MYORG gene (618255) on 9p13; and IBGC8 (618824), caused by mutation in the JAM2 gene (606870) on 21q21.
See 114100 for a childhood-onset form of idiopathic basal ganglia calcification.
The symbol IBGC3 previously referred to the locus on chromosome 8p11 that includes the SLC20A2 gene (Dai et al., 2010). However, the family that originally defined the putative IBGC1 locus on chromosome 14q (Geschwind et al., 1999) was later found to carry a pathogenic mutation in the SLC20A2 gene (Hsu et al., 2013), and the IBGC locus on chromosome 14q has not been replicated (Oliveira et al., 2004; Hsu et al., 2013). Thus, the symbol IBGC1 now refers to the disorder caused by mutation in the SLC20A2 gene on chromosome 8p11 and the symbol IBGC3 is no longer used. In addition, the symbol IBGC2 was previously used for a form of IBGC erroneously mapped to 2q37; the family in which this linkage was reported by Volpato et al. (2009) was later found by Grutz et al. (2016) to have a mutation in the SLC20A2 gene and thus to have IBGC1.
Foley (1951) reported a family in which calcification of the corpus striatum and dentate nuclei was inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Matthews (1957) and Schafroth (1958) reported affected families. Roberts (1959) reported a family with 6 affected persons in 2 generations, including an instance of male-to-male transmission. Two patients appeared refractory to the PTH-phosphaturic test, and 1 patient had low serum calcium, but the other patients had normal serum calcium. Roberts (1959) suggested a relation to PHP, but Moskowitz et al. (1971) concluded the family had familial idiopathic basal ganglia calcifications.
Pilleri (1966) reported clinicoanatomic studies of a 64-year-old man with nonarteriosclerotic, idiopathic intracerebral calcification of the blood vessels. The disorder was diagnosed radiologically in 3 generations of the family. Clinical features included fits, pyramidal symptoms, cerebellar dysarthria, and psychiatric changes. Calcification involved the media and adventitia of brain vessels of all sizes, and calcium concretions lay free in the tissues. Male-to-male transmission was not proven.
Moskowitz et al. (1971) reported a family in which 5 members spanning 2 generations had calcification of the basal ganglia. The proband was a 47-year-old man who presented with a 10-year history of progressive choreoathetosis, increasing clumsiness, progressive urinary incontinence, and difficulty with concentration and recent memory. Physical examination showed truncal and gait cerebellar ataxia, as well as dysarthria. Serum calcium and phosphorus were normal. Radiographic analysis showed symmetric calcifications of the basal ganglia and deep cerebellar nuclei. CSF was normal. A brother was similarly affected, but also had parkinsonism with bradykinesia, rigidity, and mental depression. Two asymptomatic daughters of the proband, aged 13 and 15 years, had calcification of the basal ganglia. Excretion of 3-prime, 5-prime-AMP, both basal and in response to PTH, was higher in the patients compared to controls. The findings clearly distinguished the disorder in this family from disorders of parathyroid hormone.
In 5 of 9 sibs born of related parents, Nyland and Skre (1977) found progressive encephalopathy with onset in middle life and massive calcification of the basal ganglia, dentate nuclei and cerebral sulci of the brain shown radiographically. Clinical features included mental deterioration, extrapyramidal motor deficits, cerebellar ataxia, and tremor. Serum calcium, phosphorus, and PTH were normal. Exogenous PTH induced a subnormal phosphate diuresis despite normal urinary excretion of cyclic AMP, and the authors suggested that the disorder was an unusual form of pseudo-pseudohypoparathyroidism. In this family, the disorder was consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance.
Francis (1979) described a family in which schizophreniform psychosis was associated with basal ganglia consistent with either autosomal or X-linked dominant inheritance. There were no skeletal or biochemical signs of pseudohypoparathyroidism. Calcification first became evident radiographically at puberty. Developmental delay occurred in 2 brothers whose mother was affected. One person had progressive parkinsonism, and 4 had extrapyramidal symptoms attributed to phenothiazine medication, suggesting increased sensitivity to these medications. Francis (1979) noted that a schizophrenia-like psychosis may be seen in other disorders of the basal ganglia, including Wilson disease (277900) and Huntington disease (143100).
Puvanendran and Wong (1980) reported 2 Japanese sisters who had idiopathic basal ganglia calcifications associated with severe hypertension in their teens. Follow-up of 14 years showed no neurologic deficits.
Smits et al. (1983) described 3 sibs, 2 men and a woman, with symmetric calcification in the striopallidodentate system. The eldest sib had onset in her late thirties of progressive speech and motor impairment. Neurologic examination at age 41 years showed choreic movements of the head, tongue, and limbs, as well as ataxic gait, dysarthria, and dysmetria. She also demonstrated mental deterioration. Serum calcium and phosphorus and response to PTH administration were all normal. CT scan showed dense symmetric calcifications in the striatum, globus pallidus, dentate nucleus, pons, and in the radiation of the corpus callosum. The patient's 2 younger brothers, aged 32 and 36 years, had normal neurologic exams, but showed calcifications on CT imaging. Smits et al. (1983) suggested autosomal recessive inheritance, and considered this to be the ninth reported family with autosomal recessive SPD calcinosis; others included those reported by Matthews (1957), Bruyn et al. (1964), and Nyland and Skre (1977).
Harati et al. (1984) reported a family in which 2 brothers were affected with a progressive adult-onset disorder characterized by gait impairment, parkinsonism, urinary incontinence, and cognitive decline. Serum calcium, phosphorus, and parathyroid hormone were all normal. Brain imaging in both brothers showed dense basal ganglia calcifications extending into the periventricular white matter and involvement of the dentate nucleus. A brother and mother reportedly had a similar clinical phenotype, suggesting autosomal dominant inheritance.
Ellie et al. (1989) reported father and son with striopallidodentate calcifications in whom calcium and phosphorus metabolism was normal. The father showed a progressive disorder characterized predominantly by mental deterioration, cerebellar dysarthria, and clumsiness of fine movement. He later developed partial motor seizures. Skull radiograph showed dense, symmetric calcifications in the basal ganglia and dentate nuclei. One asymptomatic son had calcifications limited to the pallidum. In a review of the literature, Ellie et al. (1989) concluded that clinical symptoms begin between ages 30 and 50 years and are relentlessly progressive. Calcifications tend to begin within the basal ganglia, later affecting the cerebellum and deep white matter.
Manyam et al. (1992) reported a family with autosomal dominant inheritance of bilateral striopallidodentate calcinosis. Calcium deposits occurred before the onset of symptoms in the third decade of life. The proband showed progressive neurologic deterioration in the fifth decade. Manyam et al. (1992) found that CT scan was superior to MRI in the diagnosis. PET scan did not reveal any disturbance in the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway. Martinelli et al. (1993) found that 3 symptomatic members of an affected family had reduced 25-OH-vitamin D3 with normal levels of 1,25(OH)2-vitamin D3, suggesting an inborn error of vitamin D metabolism. Clinical features included late onset of parkinsonism, dysarthria, and depression.
Flint and Goldstein (1992) reported a mother and son with IBGC. The son developed paranoid schizophrenia and intellectual deterioration, while the mother had no psychiatric illness. After a review of the literature, the authors concluded that psychosis may be only coincidentally associated with familial IBGC. Callender (1995) reported intracranial calcifications in a mother and 2 sons who presented in middle age with schizophrenia.
Kobari et al. (1997) reported a Japanese family in which 5 members were affected with autosomal dominant idiopathic brain calcifications. The proband was a 48-year-old man who presented with memory impairment, gait disturbances, and parkinsonism beginning in his early thirties. Serum calcium and phosphorus were normal, CSF studies were normal. Upon PTH administration, he had a normal urinary cAMP response, but a slightly reduced phosphaturic response. Brain CT showed dense calcifications in the basal ganglia bilaterally, as well as in the thalamus, hippocampus, subcortical white matter, and cerebral cortex. The patient's parents and 2 sons, aged 21 and 15 years, had calcification of the lentiform nuclei without neurologic defects. In a review of the literature, Kobari et al. (1997) noted that clinical symptoms appeared between 30 and 50 years of age and included mental decline, parkinsonism, choreoathetosis, and cerebellar ataxia. Less common features included pyramidal signs, psychiatric symptoms, and urinary incontinence. Calcifications tended to be detected first in the basal ganglia, and later in the cerebellar dentate nucleus, thalamus, subcortical white matter, and cerebral cortex. Neurologic signs correlated with increased calcium load.
Manyam et al. (2001) reported 38 patients: 30 from 5 families with autosomal dominant inheritance and 8 sporadic cases. The authors also reviewed 20 publications comprising 61 patients. Inclusion criteria included radiographic evidence of calcifications, normal childhood growth and development, and absence of parathyroid disorders. In all, 67 patients were symptomatic and 32 were asymptomatic at the time of evaluation. The most common disease manifestation was movement disorders (55%), of which parkinsonism was the most common (57%), followed by chorea (19%), tremor (8%), dystonia (8%), athetosis (5%), and orofacial dyskinesia (3%). Other common features included cognitive defects (39% of patients), speech disorders (36%), cerebellar signs (36%), psychiatric manifestations (31%), pyramidal signs (22%), and sensory symptoms (16%). Symptomatic patients had a significantly greater amount of calcification compared to asymptomatic patients. Calcification was seen in the basal ganglia, thalamus, dentate nucleus, and centrum semiovale.
Lester et al. (2006) provided a case report of a 50-year-old man with Fahr disease. He presented with dysarthria and later developed wide-based gait, inability to write, dysphagia, emotional lability, supranuclear gaze palsies, dysmetria, and focal dystonia. He also had pyramidal and cerebellar signs. Brain imaging showed diffuse intracranial calcifications in multiple brain regions, which the authors noted was unusual for Fahr disease.
Weisman et al. (2007) reported a man with Fahr disease who died 10 years after symptom onset. At age 61 years, he developed slowly progressive memory difficulties, which progressed to fine motor dysfunction and changes in personality consistent with frontotemporal dementia (see 600274). CT scan showed diffuse calcification. The patient's condition deteriorated, with passivity, dysarthria, and upper and lower motor neuron signs. Postmortem analysis showed extensive capillary and parenchymal microcalcifications throughout the white matter and the cortical and subcortical gray matter.
Families With Identified SLC20A2 Mutations
Geschwind et al. (1999) reported a multigenerational family with dominantly inherited IBGC. A 39-year-old woman with a history of symptomatic basal ganglia calcification presented her 2 daughters for neurologic evaluation of a movement disorder. One demonstrated dystonia and chorea, whereas the other manifested a coarse tremor and motor delay. The mother had initially presented with writing tremor at age 18 years, which progressed to focal dystonia and mild generalized chorea by her mid-twenties. The age at onset appeared to be decreasing by an average of more than 20 years with each transmission, suggesting genetic anticipation.
Manyam et al. (2001) reported 3 patients from a large family with autosomal dominant bilateral striopallidodentate calcinosis. The proband was found to have bilateral calcium deposits in the basal ganglia at age 42 when a CT was taken after a fall. Three years later, he developed progressive and severe parkinsonism that was responsive to L-DOPA treatment. However, the movement disorder was progressive, he developed neuropsychiatric problems, and he died of cardiac disease. Neuropathologic examination showed significant calcium deposition in multiple brain regions, including the basal ganglia, thalamus, cerebellum, pons, and white matter. Sections of the substantia nigra showed neuronal loss, gliosis, Lewy bodies, and free neuromelanin within neurons. Eighteen of 27 family members available for study showed brain calcifications on imaging, although most were asymptomatic. Only 2 other family members had calcifications associated with mild or moderate parkinsonism. Neuropathologic studies of 1 of the relatives showed no Lewy bodies. Manyam et al. (2001) concluded that the family had autosomal dominant cerebral calcinosis, but that the parkinsonism in the proband may have been coincidental.
Brodaty et al. (2002) studied a multigenerational family ascertained through 2 sisters in their seventies with radiologic evidence of basal ganglia calcification, dementia, bipolar affective disorder, and parkinsonism. Of the 10 family members with radiologic intracranial calcification, none except the 2 index cases had dementia, bipolar affective disorder, or parkinsonism. Brodaty et al. (2002) suggested that this family had a form of IBGC in which calcification is inherited independently of neurologic, cognitive, and psychiatric symptoms.
Volpato et al. (2008) reported a large multigenerational Italian family from South Tyrol with IBGC. Twenty individuals over the age of 40 had positive CT scans revealing intracranial calcifications, with 14 having bilateral moderate to severe calcification of the basal ganglia, dentate nucleus, and subcortical white matter. Six had calcifications only in the pineal gland and/or choroid plexus. The calcification was age-dependent. Four individuals had hyperreflexia, 2 of whom also had gait and upper limb ataxia, slurred speech, and intellectual impairment. Four patients had short stature, 2 had short neck, and 1 had frontal hyperostosis and upper limb hypotrophy. In this family, the radiologic penetrance was much higher than the clinical penetrance, which was low.
Dai et al. (2010) reported a large 5-generation nonconsanguineous Chinese family in which 9 individuals had idiopathic basal ganglia calcification. The proband was a 36-year-old man with headache and discomfort in the head after drinking alcohol. Brain imaging showed symmetric calcium deposition in the caudate nucleus, lentiform nucleus, globus pallidus, inferior part of thalamus, and occipital lobes. Known disorders of parathyroid hormone, calcium regulation, phosphorus metabolism, ceruloplasmin, and other infectious etiologies were excluded. Brain imaging of other family members revealed 8 additional patients with basal ganglia calcifications. However, only 4 had clinical symptoms of headache, 1 also with depression; 5 were asymptomatic. All were adults, except for 1 asymptomatic 9-year-old boy, who had calcifications only in the globus pallidus.
Wang et al. (2012) reported a 4-generation Chinese family with autosomal dominant IBGC. Five patients were clinically asymptomatic and 1 had parkinsonism and cerebral infarction at age 73 years. However, the index case was a 12-year-old girl with epilepsy starting at age 1 year, followed by developmental delay and mental retardation after about age 4. Serum calcium, phosphate, and parathyroid hormone were normal. Brain MRI showed marked symmetric calcium deposition in the basal ganglia, inferior part of the thalamus, cerebellum, frontal, temporal, and occipital cortices, and subcortex. Her younger sister had a similarly severe phenotype, with mental retardation, epilepsy, dysarthria, and ataxia associated with marked calcium deposition throughout the brain. The images of these 2 patients with a severe clinical phenotype showed significantly more calcium deposition compared to the asymptomatic patients, who had calcium deposition primarily limited to the basal ganglia and inferior part of the thalamus.



PIK3R1
**?Agammaglobulinemia 7, autosomal recessive, 615214 (3), AR**
De la Morena et al. (1995) reported a 6-month-old Hispanic girl of Chinese and Peruvian Indian ancestry who presented at age 3.5 months with interstitial pneumonia and gastroenteritis. Laboratory studies showed agammaglobulinemia, neutropenia, and lack of mature B cells in the peripheral blood and bone marrow. Lymph nodes showed lack of B cells, plasma cells, and germinal center formation. T cells and T-cell function were normal. Presence of CD10+ cells but absence of CD19+ cells and a 10-fold decrease of mature V-D-J-C-mu transcripts suggested a blockage at an earlier stage of B-cell development than that observed in the X-linked form of agammaglobulinemia (300755); genetic analysis excluded a defect in the BTK gene (300300).
Conley et al. (2012) provided follow-up of the patient reported by de la Morena et al. (1995), who was 19 years old and showed a severe defect in very early B-cell development. As a teenager, she developed erythema nodosum, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, and recurrent Campylobacter bacteremia and inflammatory bowel disease, suggesting disordered cytokine production. The family history was positive for 2 older brothers and 2 maternal uncles who died of acute infections between 9 and 18 months of age.
**Immunodeficiency 36, 616005 (3), AD**
IMD36 is a primary immunodeficiency with a highly heterogeneous clinical phenotype, characterized primarily by recurrent respiratory tract infections, lymphoproliferation, and antibody deficiency. Other features include growth retardation, mild neurodevelopmental delay, and autoimmunity. The major complication is development of B-cell lymphoma (Elkaim et al., 2016).
Deau et al. (2014) reported 4 patients from 3 unrelated families with a primary immunodeficiency. A mother and son were affected in 1 of the families. Two patients presented with recurrent respiratory infections at age 6 months, a third at age 2 years, and the fourth at age 13 years. All had bacterial infections, but only 1 patient had chronic viremia with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and cytomegalovirus (CMV). None had features of allergy, autoimmunity, splenomegaly, or lymphadenopathy. Lymphocyte counts were in the normal range, but there were decreased numbers of naive CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. Two patients had a deficiency of memory B cells. One patient had almost complete absence of switched memory B cells, whereas the other 3 patients had increased transitional B cells. All had impaired B-cell function with hypogammaglobulinemia associated with increased IgM. T-cell blasts displayed enhanced activation-induced cell death, and B cells showed weak proliferation in response to activation via the B-cell receptor and TLR9 (605474). Three patients were on Ig replacement therapy.
Lucas et al. (2014) studied 4 patients from 3 unrelated families with immunodeficiency, including a 32-year-old Turkish woman (family A), a Caucasian American 43-year-old mother and her 17-year-old son (family B), and a 5-year-old Chinese boy (family C). The patients showed a similar phenotype involving recurrent sinopulmonary infections, poor production of class-switched antibodies, and lymphoproliferation, with splenomegaly present in 3 of the 4 patients. All had low serum IgG and IgA levels; however, IgM was elevated in the Turkish woman, normal in the Caucasian American boy, and low in the Chinese boy. Additional features included the development of arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease in adulthood in the Turkish woman, and severe juvenile arthritis in the Chinese boy. All required intravenous immunoglobulin supplementation and had a low CD4/CD8 ratio due to expansion of CD8 T cells. The authors noted that the clinical features of immunodeficiency, lymphoproliferation, poor immunoglobulin responses, and expansion of CD8 T cells with susceptibility to inflammatory disease were consistent with immunodeficiency-14 (IMD14; 615513).
Lougaris et al. (2015) reported 4 unrelated children from Albania, Italy, and Sweden, with immunodeficiency and mutations in the PIK3R1 gene. All had hypogammaglobulinemia with elevated serum IgM levels, and all exhibited lymphoproliferation, with 2 developing severe tonsillar hypertrophy and 1 having splenomegaly; 3 of the 4 patients also showed poor growth. In addition, 2 exhibited an abnormal expansion of immature B cells with a concomitant reduction of mature B cells, which the authors stated was a pattern not previously reported in PIK3R1-mutated patients.
Elkaim et al. (2016) retrospectively analyzed 36 patients with PIK3R1-associated immunodeficiency, including the 8 patients previously reported by Deau et al. (2014) and Lucas et al. (2014). The most common features were recurrent upper respiratory tract infections (100%), pneumonitis (71%), and chronic lymphoproliferation (89%), including adenopathy (75%), splenomegaly (43%), and upper respiratory tract lymphoid hyperplasia (48%). Growth retardation was frequently observed (45%). Other complications were mild neurodevelopmental delay (31%), malignant diseases (28%) consisting mostly of B-cell lymphomas, autoimmunity (17%), bronchiectasis (18%), and chronic diarrhea (24%). The predominant immunologic features included decreased serum IgA and IgG levels (87%), increased IgM levels (58%), B-cell lymphopenia (88%) associated with an increased frequency of transitional B cells (93%), and decreased numbers of naive CD4 and naive CD8 cells but increased numbers of CD8 effector/memory T cells. The majority of patients (89%) received immunoglobulin replacement. Five patients died, including 4 from lymphoma. Elkaim et al. (2016) designated the immunodeficiency disorder 'activated phosphoinositide 3-kinase delta syndrome-2' (APDS2) or PASLI-R1; see IMD14, 615513.
**SHORT syndrome, 269880 (3), AD**
'Short,' the mnemonic designation for this syndrome, is an acronym: S = stature; H = hyperextensibility of joints or hernia (inguinal) or both; O = ocular depression; R = Rieger anomaly; T = teething delay. The name was given by Gorlin (1975), who described the syndrome in 2 brothers.
Dyment et al. (2013) noted that the features listed in the acronym for SHORT syndrome do not capture the full range of the clinical phenotype, which can include a recognizable facial gestalt consisting of triangular facies, lack of facial fat, and hypoplastic nasal alae with overhanging columella, as well as near-universal partial lipodystrophy, insulin resistance, nephrocalcinosis, and hearing deficits. Notably, both developmental milestones and cognition are normal for individuals with SHORT syndrome.
Sensenbrenner et al. (1975) described a 6-year-old girl with Rieger anomaly, short stature, and partial lipodystrophy of the face and upper limbs. She also had delayed dental eruption, delayed bone age, and hyperextensibility of the joints. Gorlin (1975) reported the same condition in 2 brothers, aged 11 and 4 years. Gorlin (1975) suggested autosomal recessive inheritance because of possible consanguinity in 1 set of parents.
Aarskog et al. (1983) described a family from the Lofoten Islands of Norway in which 4 persons in 3 generations had nonprogressive lipodystrophy present from infancy affecting primarily the face and buttocks. Affected persons also had the Rieger anomaly, midface hypoplasia, retarded bone age, and hypotrichosis. Of 2 sisters, 1 had glucose intolerance at age 55 years, and the other had insulinopenic diabetes mellitus at age 39 years. Aarskog et al. (1983) suggested that the disorder in their family was distinct from SHORT syndrome because of the absence of joint hypermobility and less extensive lipodystrophy in their patients.
Toriello et al. (1985) reported a patient with SHORT syndrome characterized by lipoatrophy, delayed speech development, clinodactyly, and short stature. The boy also had deafness, which the authors noted had not previously been reported in the SHORT syndrome. Stratton et al. (1989) reported a brother and sister with short stature, delayed bone age, developmental delay, congenital hip dislocation, and iridocorneal abnormalities with onset of glaucoma at or soon after birth. Many of the features resembled those of the SHORT syndrome, but triangular face and lipoatrophy were not present.
Schwingshandl et al. (1993) described a girl with most of the typical features of SHORT syndrome who, at age 14 years, developed nonketotic hyperglycemia. At the age of 16.5 years, diabetes mellitus with severe insulin resistance was diagnosed. From an early age, the patient had had partial lipodystrophy, as well as megalocornea and a peculiar progeria-like face. At age 6 years, bilateral sensorineural hearing loss was detected.
Verge et al. (1994) also described insulin-resistant diabetes in SHORT syndrome. They suggested that defective function of insulin receptors in adipose tissue may explain the paucity of fat storage in this disorder.
Bankier et al. (1995) described the association of triangular face, deep-set eyes, micrognathia, small facial bones, and narrow body build in 3 members of an English family and in an unrelated Australian girl. Absence of iridal stroma was found in the Australian girl and in the English mother; the son of the English woman also had sensorineural deafness. Bankier et al. (1995) noted that the symptom complex was similar to the SHORT syndrome, although all 4 patients had low-normal height and did not manifest joint hyperextensibility. Reardon and Temple (2008) reported that 1 of the female patients reported by Bankier et al. (1995) developed nephrocalcinosis as an adult. The affected son of this patient, who was diagnosed with SHORT syndrome in the neonatal period, had nephrocalcinosis and increased serum and urinary calcium at 2 months of age.
Sorge et al. (1996) described a 9-year-old Italian boy with short stature, partial lipodystrophy, minor facial anomalies, mild hyperextensibility of joints, ocular depression, Rieger anomaly, and delay in speech development and dental eruption. Because the father and sister showed a striking similarity to the propositus, Sorge et al. (1996) suggested an autosomal dominant gene with variable expression in this family. The sister had bilateral and symmetrical lens opacities, a feature that had not been reported previously in affected subjects or their relatives. Sorge et al. (1996) suggested that the disorder reported by Aarskog et al. (1983) was the same disorder.
Brodsky et al. (1996) added congenital glaucoma as a feature of the SHORT syndrome. Their patient was a 9-year-old boy who had enlarged cloudy corneas, Rieger anomaly, and elevated intraocular pressure at birth. He also had bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, short stature, and mild developmental delay. The face had a triangular configuration with prominent forehead, deeply set eyes, thin nasal alae, and a proportionately small middle and lower face. The face and chest showed diminished subcutaneous fat, and the hands had thin, dry, wrinkled skin, producing a progeroid appearance. A paternal uncle reportedly had a similar appearance.
Koenig et al. (2003) described a mother and son with short stature, progeroid facies, Rieger anomaly, teething delay, mild developmental retardation, particularly speech delay, and a slight build with lack of subcutaneous fat. Resistance to insulin was suggested by an oral glucose tolerance test in the mother, whereas the test was normal in the son at the age of 2 years. After reviewing the reported cases of SHORT syndrome, Koenig et al. (2003) concluded that 5 familial cases in different generations, equally affected male and female patients, and male-to-male transmission support autosomal dominant inheritance, possibly with germline mosaicism in the cases of affected sibs and unaffected parents.
Reardon and Temple (2008) reported 3 patients, including a mother and son previously reported by Bankier et al. (1995), with a clinical diagnosis of SHORT syndrome who all developed nephrocalcinosis. Two of the patients had nephrocalcinosis in infancy and also showed increased serum and urinary calcium. Reardon and Temple (2008) postulated that disordered calcium metabolism may be a previously unreported feature of SHORT syndrome.
Reis et al. (2011) studied a 6-year-old Caucasian girl with a diagnosis of SHORT syndrome, whose ocular features included Rieger anomaly, congenital glaucoma, microcornea, and nystagmus. She had short stature, poor weight gain, and macrocephaly, as well as hyperextensible joints, delayed eruption of teeth, decreased subcutaneous fat in the upper trunk and head, and dysmorphic facial features including prominent forehead, sunken eyes, small chin, and hypoplastic nares. Her hearing was normal, hands and feet were small with normal structure, and umbilicus was described as 'a bit pouchy' with mildly increased skin. Brain MRI showed normal structures.
Avila et al. (2016) reviewed the clinical features of 32 individuals, including 8 newly ascertained patients, with genetically confirmed SHORT syndrome. The major features described in the SHORT acronym were not universally seen, and only half (52%) had 4 or more of the classic features. The most common features included intrauterine and postnatal growth restriction, lipoatrophy, and a characteristic facial gestalt characterized by a progeroid appearance with prominent forehead, triangular face, deep-set eyes, hypoplastic alae nasi, midface hypoplasia, small chin, low-set ears, and downturned mouth. Hyperextensible joints or inguinal hernia was found in only 10 of 29 cases, and Rieger anomaly was only found in 13 of 30 cases, although some patients had other anterior chamber defects. Insulin resistance was found in 13 of 17 patients, and diabetes was found in 9 of 14. Three patients had cardiac anomalies and 5 had sensorineural deafness. Avila et al. (2016) concluded that cardinal features of the disorder warranting monitoring include lipoatrophy and insulin resistance, and that minor features of SHORT syndrome should include teething delay, thin wrinkled skin, speech delay, sensorineural deafness, hyperextensibility of joints, and inguinal hernia.



PCNT
**Nephrotic syndrome, type 17, 618176 (3), AR**
NPHS17, a disease of the renal glomerular filter, is characterized by proteinuria, edema, and hypoalbuminemia. It does not respond to drug treatment and inevitably progresses to end-stage renal disease, thus requiring dialysis or renal transplantation for survival. Renal histology shows focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (Braun et al., 2018).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of nephrotic syndrome, see NPHS1 (256300).
Braun et al. (2018) reported 4 patients from 3 unrelated families who presented between 4 and 11 years of age with steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome and microscopic hematuria. Renal biopsy showed focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Three patients progressed to end-stage renal disease between 7 and 12 years of age. Two unrelated patients had short stature, and 2 sibs in 1 family had intellectual disability.
**Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism, type II, 210720 (3), AR**
Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II is characterized by intrauterine growth retardation, severe proportionate short stature, and microcephaly. It is distinct from Seckel syndrome (see 210600) by more severe growth retardation, radiologic abnormalities, and absent or mild mental retardation (summary by Willems et al., 2010).
In 3 unrelated children, Majewski et al. (1982) described a form of intrauterine and postnatal dwarfism with microcephaly and facial features resembling those of Seckel syndrome (see 210600) but with anomalies of bones: disproportionate shortness of forearms and legs in the first years of life, brachymesophalangy, brachymetacarpy I, V-shaped flare of at least the distal femoral metaphyses, triangular shape of the distal femoral epiphyses, high and narrow pelvis, proximal femoral epiphysiolysis, and coxa vara. They pointed to seemingly identical cases reported by Brizard et al. (1973) and Anoussakis et al. (1974). All 5 cases were sporadic. Majewski (1982) suggested that this might be the same as the Taybi-Linder syndrome (MOPD1; 210710). Willems et al. (1987) reported what they presumed to be the sixth case in a child of consanguineous parents. The genetics may be clarified by the findings of Verloes et al. (1987) who observed male and female affected sibs, the offspring of first-cousin parents. One of the affected sibs reported by Verloes et al. (1987) was a twin. Inasmuch as the other twin was unaffected, a photograph of the twins demonstrated the abnormality dramatically.
Sugio et al. (1993) reported a case. The mother was short, with a small head and disproportionately short forearms and legs, for which reason Sugio et al. (1993) suggested dominant inheritance. It would seem equally likely that the mother was a manifesting heterozygote.
Al Gazali et al. (1995) reported a typical case of the syndrome in a girl of Baluch origin. Complex consanguinity in this family confirmed autosomal recessive inheritance of the disorder.
This disorder was mentioned as a possibility in the case of 2 African American brothers who had microcephaly, short stature, and generalized microdontia (Lin et al., 1995). The face was not typical of Seckel syndrome. Radiographic features of the skeleton were mild, yet growth was severely delayed.
Masuno et al. (1995) described a 22-month-old Japanese girl with microcephaly, prominent nose, pre- and postnatal dwarfism, increased intraocular pressure, mesomelic shortening of the legs, brachydactyly, multiple pseudoepiphyses in the bases of the metacarpals, coxa valga, wide pelvis with iliac flaring, disharmonious maturation of the epiphyses, and patent cranial sutures. The girl resembled children with osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism II, although she did not have mesomelic shortening of the forearms, metaphyseal flaring, or typical narrow pelvis. Masuno et al. (1995) could not exclude the possibility that this case represented a new variant of osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism.
Halder et al. (1998) described a 7-year-old boy with osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II with normal intellect but delayed myelination on brain MRI.
Majewski and Goecke (1998) reported 3 new cases of MOPD II and reviewed 14 published cases. All children had marked intrauterine and postnatal growth failure, disproportionate microcephaly, and mental retardation. They were disproportionately short statured due to short limbs. Characteristic skeletal anomalies included small iliac wings with flat acetabular angles, coxa vara, V-shaped distal femoral metaphyses, and triangular distal femoral epiphyses, as well as metacarpal pseudoepiphyses, short first metacarpals, and brachymesophalangy V. One of their cases developed bilateral epiphysiolysis of the femoral heads at age 3. Majewski and Goecke (1998) commented that the cases of Sugio et al. (1993) probably represent another type of intrauterine growth retardation, as neither the mother nor the child was as small as in MOPD II and the mother's intellect was normal.
Fukuzawa et al. (2002) reported the autopsy findings in a Japanese girl with typical clinical and radiologic features of MOPD II. The manifestations included severe intrauterine and postnatal growth failure, microcephaly, a distinctive facial appearance, micromelia, brachytelephalangy, coxa vera, and V-shaped metaphyses of the distal femurs. Other than small cerebral hemispheres, no neuropathologic abnormalities were found. Chondroosseous histology showed thinning of the growth plate, ballooned chondrocytes, reduced cellularity, lack of zonal and columnar formations, and poor formation of primary trabeculae. These findings suggested that impairment of chondrocytic formation and differentiation is the major pathogenesis of MOPD II.
Fukuzawa et al. (2002) compared the pathology of Seckel syndrome with that of MOPD types I (210710), II, and III (210730).
Hall et al. (2004) reviewed the clinical features of MOPD II on the basis of 58 affected individuals (27 from the literature and 31 previously unreported cases). The remarkable features of MOPD II were found to be severe intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) and severe postnatal growth retardation; relatively proportionate head size at birth which progresses to true and disproportionate microcephaly; progressive disproportion of the short stature secondary to shortening of the distal and middle segments of the limbs; a progressive bony dysplasia with metaphyseal changes in the limbs; epiphyseal delay; progressive loose-jointedness with occasional dislocation or subluxation of the knees, radial heads, and hips; unusual facial features including a prominent nose, eyes that appear prominent in infancy and early childhood, ears that are proportionate, mildly dysplastic, and usually missing the lobule; a high squeaky voice; abnormally small, and often dysplastic or missing, dentition; a pleasant, outgoing, sociable personality; and autosomal recessive inheritance. Hyperopia, scoliosis, unusual pigmentation, and truncal obesity often develop with time. Some individuals seem to have increased susceptibility to infections. There was variability between affected individuals even within the same family. Useful clinical photographs were provided.
Piane et al. (2009) reported a 3-year-old Italian boy who had prenatal onset of proportionate dwarfism, postnatal severe microcephaly, high forehead with receding hairline, sparse scalp hair, beaked nose, mild retrognathia, and hypotonia, who was diagnosed at birth with Seckel syndrome. At age 3 years, he developed paresis of the right arm due to stenosis of the median cerebral artery. X-ray examination showed high iliac wings, narrow ischia and pubis, overtubulated long bones, delta-shaped distal femoral metaphyses with marked widening, brachytelemesophalangia, and delayed bone age. Given the proportionate head size at birth, subsequent growth retardation, cerebrovascular abnormalities, and evidence for skeletal dysplasia, the diagnosis was changed from Seckel to MOPD II.
Clinical Variability
In a Thai brother and sister, Kantaputra (2002) described a syndrome of proportionate primordial short stature, severe microdontia with opalescent teeth and rootless molars, severely hypoplastic alveolar bone, large sella turcica, and slender and straight clavicles with hypoplastic scapulae. Facial features included large nose with prominent nasal bridge and small pinnae. There were areas of hypo- and hyperpigmentation that did not follow Blaschko lines, and the scalp hair was dry and thin. Intelligence and hearing were normal. Both sibs had narrow chests and pelvises, decreased elbow extension, distal symphalangism of toes, and brachymesophalangy of fingers. Radiographic features of the hands and wrists included ivory and cone-shaped epiphyses that usually disappeared with age and angular scaphoid and trapezium bones.
Kantaputra et al. (2004) reported 2 Thai children, male and female third cousins, with the same syndrome as the brother and sister reported by Kantaputra (2002). Features of microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism included intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR), microcephaly, prominent nose and nasal bridge, small pinnae, short stature, cone-shaped and ivory epiphyses, delayed bone age, slender long bones, and abnormal pelvis. Additional features pointing to a distinct syndrome, which the authors designated 'MOPD with tooth abnormalities,' consisted of severe microdontia, malformed teeth, single-rooted or rootless teeth, severely hypoplastic alveolar bone, cafe-au-lait spots, acanthosis nigricans, and areas of hypo- and hyperpigmented skin.
Hall (2005) argued that the patients reported by Kantaputra (2002) and Kantaputra et al. (2004) as having a distinct entity, MOPD with tooth anomalies, in fact had classic MOPD II. Kantaputra and Tanpaiboon (2005) responded that although the disorders may be allelic, the microdontia in those patients 'was severe beyond the spectrum of MOPD type II.'
Kantaputra et al. (2011) provided follow-up on the 2 unrelated Thai families with MOPD and tooth anomalies, previously reported by Kantaputra (2002) and Kantaputra et al. (2004). The brother and sister reported in 2002, now 26 and 24 years old, respectively, were healthy except for MOPD II-related features. The brother had lost all of his permanent teeth, whereas the sister had 5 remaining permanent teeth with 1 unerupted right mandibular premolar, and in both sibs the alveolar bone was severely hypoplastic. Reevaluation at ages 12 and 10 years, respectively, of the cousins reported in 2004 showed that primary teeth were of normal size but permanent teeth were extremely small, measuring 2 mm to 2.5 mm mesiodistally. The authors commented that the teeth were 'probably the smallest ever reported.' All first permanent molars, however, were of normal size but rootless. The male cousin died of unknown cause at 11 years of age; the girl was otherwise healthy. All 4 patients had skin that was hypo- and hyperpigmented, dry, and appeared darker as they aged; multiple creases were present on the palms and soles. After molecular analysis revealed mutations in the PCNT gene in affected individuals from both families (see MOLECULAR GENETICS), Kantaputra et al. (2011) concluded that the severe microdontia and alveolar bone hypoplasia in these patients, which seemed to indicate a distinct syndrome, instead represented the variability of the MOPD II phenotype.



SNRPN
**Prader-Willi syndrome, 176270 (3), AD**
Prader-Willi syndrome is characterized by diminished fetal activity, obesity, muscular hypotonia, mental retardation, short stature, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and small hands and feet. It can be considered to be an autosomal dominant disorder and is caused by deletion or disruption of a gene or several genes on the proximal long arm of the paternal chromosome 15 or maternal uniparental disomy 15, because the gene(s) on the maternal chromosome(s) 15 are virtually inactive through imprinting. Horsthemke and Wagstaff (2008) provided a detailed review of the mechanisms of imprinting of the Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome (105830) region.
See also the chromosome 15q11-q13 duplication syndrome (608636), which shows overlapping clinical features.
The original paper by Prader et al. (1956) described the full clinical picture.
Prenatal
Mothers with prior experience of normal pregnancies almost without exception report distinctly delayed onset and reduced fetal activity during the pregnancies involving Prader-Willi children. Obstetricians often fail to detect diminished fetal activity with ultrasound investigation. When reduced fetal activity is observed, prenatal cytogenetic examination produces normal results because cytogeneticists were not instructed to look for the characteristic chromosomal changes of PWS (Schinzel, 1986). Alert clinicians should refer CVS material from pregnancies with fetuses that demonstrate poor activity for molecular diagnosis of the syndrome (see below). Other candidates for prenatal diagnosis of PWS are fetuses of pregnancies in which trisomy 15 or mosaic trisomy 15 was determined from CVS, and in which subsequent amniocyte or fetal blood examinations disclosed a normal diploid karyotype. Theoretically, one-third of trisomy 15 fetuses initially with 2 maternal chromosomes 15 and 1 paternal chromosome 15 should give rise to Prader-Willi syndrome patients exhibiting maternal uniparental disomy (Cassidy et al., 1992; Purvis-Smith et al., 1992; Hall, 1992).
Perinatal
Neonates are profoundly hypotonic, which often causes asphyxia. In addition, there is mild prenatal growth retardation with a mean birth weight of about 6 lbs (2.8 kg) at term, hyporeflexia, poor feeding due to diminished swallowing and sucking reflexes, which in many cases necessitates gavage feeding for about 3 to 4 months. Cryptorchidism occurs with hypoplastic penis and scrotum in boys and hypoplastic labiae in girls (Stephenson, 1980). Chitayat et al. (1989) commented on the normal size of hands and feet at birth and in the first year of life.
Miller et al. (1999) described 6 newborns evaluated for hypotonia who were later diagnosed with Prader-Willi syndrome. These newborns lacked the classic neonatal features of the syndrome (peculiar cry, characteristic craniofacial features, and clinical evidence of hypogonadism). The authors suggested that specific genetic testing for PWS be considered for all neonates with undiagnosed central hypotonia even in the absence of the other major features of the syndrome.
Oiglane-Shlik et al. (2006) studied 5 newborns with hypotonia, poor arousal, weak or absent cry, and no interest in food, in whom PWS was confirmed by the abnormal methylation test. All had a distinctive facial appearance, with high prominent forehead, narrow bifrontal diameter, downturned corners of the mouth, micrognathia, and dysplastic ears. Three neonates had a high-arched palate, and 4 had arachnodactyly. In the first few days of life, 4 of the 5 patients demonstrated a peculiar position of the hands, with the thumb constantly adducted over the index and middle finger. All 5 patients had transient bradycardia, thermolability, and acrocyanosis; and 3 also showed marked skin mottling, as previously reported by Chitayat et al. (1989).
Infancy and Childhood
Feeding difficulties generally improve by the age of 6 months. From 12 to 18 months onward, uncontrollable hyperphagia causes major somatic as well as psychologic problems. Diminished growth is observed in the majority of infants (Butler and Meaney, 1987). Small hands with delicate and tapering fingers and small feet (acromicria) are seen in most infants and adolescents; hand and foot sizes correlate well with length, but not with age, and foot size tends to be lower than hand size. However, patients of normal height tend to have normally sized hands (Hudgins and Cassidy, 1991). The face is characterized by a narrow bifrontal diameter, almond-shaped eyes (often in mild upslanted position), strabismus, full cheeks, and diminished mimic activity due to muscular hypotonia. Plethoric obesity becomes the most striking feature. From the age of about 6 years onward, many children present scars from scratching due to itching, and later, almost all show abdominal striae.
Depigmentation relative to the familial background is a feature in about three-quarters of the patients. Butler (1989), Hittner et al. (1982), and several authors remarked that this sign is confined to cases with deletions and absent in those with maternal disomy 15. Phelan et al. (1988) presented a black female child with oculocutaneous albinism, PWS, and an interstitial deletion of 15q11.2. Patients with classic albinism (203100) have misrouting of optic fibers, with fibers from 20 degrees or more of the temporal retina crossing at the chiasm instead of projecting to the ipsilateral hemisphere. Misrouting can result in strabismus and nystagmus. Because patients with PWS have hypopigmentation and strabismus, Creel et al. (1986) studied 6 patients, selected for a history of strabismus, with pattern-onset visual evoked potentials on binocular and monocular stimulation. Of the 4 with hypopigmentation, 3 had abnormal evoked potentials indistinguishable from those recorded in albinos. The 2 with normal pigmentation had normal responses. Wiesner et al. (1987) found that 14 of 29 patients with PWS had ocular hypopigmentation. There was possible correlation between hypopigmentation and a deletion of 15q.
MacMillan et al. (1972) described 2 unrelated girls with the features of PWS who additionally showed precocious puberty. They suggested that this is a variant and that a hypothalamic disturbance is responsible for this disorder. Hall and Smith (1972) pointed out narrow bifrontal cranial diameter as a feature. Hall (1985) pointed to a possibly increased risk of leukemia in PWS.
A frequent feature generally overlooked is thick saliva at the edges of the mouth. Patients tend to be relatively insensitive to pain (including that caused by obtaining blood samples)(Prader, 1991).
Eiholzer et al. (1999) presented data on body composition and leptin (164160) levels of 13 young, still underweight children and 10 older overweight children with Prader-Willi syndrome. Both groups showed elevated skinfold standard deviation scores for body mass index and elevated body mass index-adjusted leptin levels, suggesting relatively increased body fat even in underweight children. Leptin production appeared to be intact. The authors concluded that body composition in PWS is already disturbed in infancy, long before the development of obesity.
Van Mil et al. (2001) compared body composition in 17 patients with PWS with 17 obese control patients matched for gender and bone age. In children with PWS, adiposity was associated with reduced fat-free mass, and extracellular-to-intracellular water ratio was increased. Both findings are related to growth hormone (GH; 139250) function and physical activity. Bone mineral density, especially in the limbs, tends to be reduced in patients with PWS and is related to growth hormone function.
Gunay-Aygun et al. (2001) reviewed the sensitivity of PWS diagnostic criteria and proposed revised criteria for DNA testing. From birth to 2 years any infant with hypotonia and poor suck should have DNA testing for the PWS deletion. From age 2 to 6 years any child with hypotonia and a history of poor suck and global developmental delay should have DNA testing. From 6 years to 12 years any child with history of hypotonia and poor suck, global developmental delay, and excessive eating with central obesity should be tested for PWS.
Adolescence and Adulthood
Greenswag (1987) reported on a survey of 232 adults with PWS, ranging in age from 16 to 64 years. Of 106 patients whose chromosomes were analyzed, 54 had an abnormality of chromosome 15, primarily a deletion. Physical characteristics, health problems, intelligence, psychosocial adjustment, and impact on the family were reviewed. Emotional lability, poor gross motor skills, cognitive impairment, and insatiable hunger were especially remarkable features.
Olander et al. (2000) pointed to the occurrence of 3 PWS phenotypes: patients with paternal deletions have the typical PWS phenotype; patients with maternal UPD have a slightly milder phenotype with better cognitive function; and patients with maternal UPD and mosaic trisomy 15 have the most severe phenotype with a high incidence of congenital heart disease. They described a patient with the severe phenotype with maternal isodisomy rather than the more common maternal heterodisomy. They concluded that the more severe PWS phenotype was due to trisomy 15 mosaicism rather than to homozygosity for deleterious chromosome 15 genes.
In contrast to infants, adults invariably are small compared to their family members (Butler and Meaney, 1987). Due to high caloric intake, alimentary diabetes frequently sets in during or soon after the period of puberty. Puberty itself is diminished in PWS patients of both sexes. Adolescents and young adults often require digitalization because of cardiac insufficiency; however, it has been shown that substantial weight reduction relieves the need of cardiac therapy. Any attempt to reduce food intake in these adolescents often leads to serious psychologic and behavioral problems, and in some children, the situation in their home environment becomes intolerable (Curfs et al., 1991). Patients rarely survive beyond 25 to 30 years of age, the cause of death being diabetes and cardiac failure. However, if strict weight control is achieved, both diabetes and cardiac failure are greatly reduced and survival is either not or only mildly reduced. Johnsen et al. (1967) studied 7 mentally retarded patients, aged 4 to 19 years. Studies showed that fat synthesis from acetate during fasting was 10 times greater in patients than in unaffected sibs, and that hormone-stimulated lipolysis was depressed. These workers suggested that the condition is comparable to the genetic obese-hyperglycemic mouse. Since during fasting substrate continues to be used for new fat and lipolysis is deficient, survival depends on a continuous supply of exogenous calories. The abundant fat, muscle hypotonia, and small feet and hands are exactly the opposite of the sparse fat, muscle hypertrophy, and large hands and feet in Seip syndrome (269700).
Hoybye et al. (2002) studied the clinical, genetic, endocrinologic, and metabolic findings in 10 male and 9 female adult PWS patients (mean age, 25 years). The PWS karyotype was demonstrated in 13 patients. The mean BMI was 35.6 kg/m2, and total body fat was increased. Two-thirds were biochemically hypogonadal. Fifty percent had severe GH deficiency. Four were hypertensive. One patient had heart failure and diabetes. Impaired glucose tolerance was seen in 4 patients, elevated homeostasis model assessment index in 9, and modest dyslipidemia in 7. IGF-binding protein-1 (146730) correlated negatively with insulin (176730) levels. Four patients had osteoporosis, and 11 had osteopenia. There was no significant difference between the group with the PWS karyotype and the group without the karyotype in age, BMI, waist-to-hip ratio, percent body fat, insulin values, homeostasis model assessment index, or lipid profile, except for lipoprotein(a) (152200), which was significantly higher in the group with the negative karyotype. Hoybye et al. (2002) concluded that the risk factors found predicting cardiovascular disease were secondary to GHD and emphasized the importance of evaluating treatment of GHD in adults with PWS.
Curfs et al. (1991) concluded that PWS patients score better on visual motor discrimination skills than on auditory verbal processing skills.
Wise et al. (1991) described 5 patients with PWS who experienced recurrent hyperthermia in infancy. On the basis of these patients and other reports of abnormal temperature regulation in PWS patients, particularly hypothermia with exposure to cold, they concluded that defects in temperature regulation may be a manifestation of hypothalamic dysfunction in PWS. On the other hand, Cassidy and McKillop (1991) concluded on the basis of a survey that clinically significant abnormal temperature control is not a common finding in this disorder. Similarly, Williams et al. (1994) concluded on the basis of a survey that the prevalence of febrile convulsions, fever-associated symptoms, and temperature less than 94 degrees F were not unique to PWS but can occur in any neurodevelopmentally handicapped individual and do not necessarily reflect syndrome-specific hypothalamic abnormalities.
Individuals with Prader-Willi syndrome manifest severe skin picking behavior. Bhargava et al. (1996) described 3 adolescent patients in whom an extension of this behavior to rectal picking resulted in significant lower gastrointestinal bleeding and anal rectal disease. Recognition of this behavior is important to avoid misdiagnosing inflammatory bowel disease in PWS patients.
Wharton et al. (1997) presented 6 patients with PWS with dramatic acute gastric distention. In 3 young adult women with vomiting and apparent gastroenteritis, clinical course progressed rapidly to massive gastric dilatation and gastric necrosis. One patient died of overwhelming sepsis and disseminated intravascular coagulation. In 2 children, gastric dilatation resolved spontaneously. Gastrectomy was performed in 2 cases; in 1, gastrectomy was subtotal and distal, whereas in the other, gastrectomy was combined with partial duodenectomy and pancreatectomy. All specimens showed ischemic gastroenteritis. There was diffuse mucosal infarction with multifocal transmural necrosis.
From a study of 10 African Americans with PWS, Hudgins et al. (1998) pointed out that the clinical features differ from those of white patients. Growth is less affected, hand and foot lengths usually are normal, and the facies are atypical; as a result, PWS may be underdiagnosed in this population.
Lindgren et al. (2000) studied the microstructure of eating behavior in patients with PWS and compared it with that of members of obese and normal weight control groups of the same age. PWS patients had a mean age of 10 +/- 4 years, while the control groups were 12 +/- 3 years (normal weight) and 12 +/- 4 years (obese). Subjects with PWS had a longer duration of eating rate compared with members of both obese and normal weight groups. In subjects with PWS, 56% of the eating curves were non-decelerating, compared with 10% of the normal weight group and 30% of the obese group. Lindgren et al. (2000) concluded that the eating behavior found in subjects with PWS might be due to decreased satiation rather than increased hunger.
Nagai et al. (2000) reported standard growth curves for height and weight among Japanese children with Prader-Willi syndrome. No difference in height was seen between those with and those without chromosome 15q deletion.
Cassidy et al. (1997) personally examined and studied using molecular techniques 54 individuals with PWS to determine whether there are phenotypic differences between patients with the syndrome due to deletion (present in 37) or uniparental disomy (present in 17) as the mechanism. Previously recognized increased maternal age in patients with UPD and increased frequency of hypopigmentation in those with deletion were confirmed. Although the frequency and severity of most other manifestations of PWS did not differ significantly between the 2 groups, those with UPD were less likely to have a 'typical' facial appearance. In addition, this group was less likely to show some of the minor manifestations such as skin picking, skill with jigsaw puzzles, and high pain threshold. Females and those with UPD were also older, on average.
Gunay-Aygun et al. (2001) proposed new revised criteria for DNA testing for individuals in adolescence and adulthood. Anyone with cognitive impairment (usually mild mental retardation), excessive eating with central obesity, and hypothalamic hypogonadism, and/or typical behaviors, including temper tantrums and obsessive-compulsive features, should be referred for DNA testing for PWS.
Among 25 patients with PWS aged 18 years or older, Boer et al. (2002) found that 7 (28%) had severe affective disorder with psychotic features, with a mean age of onset of 26 years. The 7 affected persons, all aged 28 years or older, included all 5 with disomies of chromosome 15, 1 with a deletion in this chromosome, and 1 with an imprinting center mutation in the same chromosome. They postulated that in PWS, an abnormal pattern of expression of a sex-specific imprinted gene on chromosome 15 is associated with psychotic illness in early adult life.
Vogels et al. (2004) detailed the psychopathologic manifestations of 6 adults with PWS and a history of psychotic episodes. Characteristics of the psychotic disorder included early and acute onset, polymorphous and shifting symptoms, psychiatric hospitalization along with precipitating stress factors, and a prodromal phase of physiologic symptoms.
To evaluate the risk of cancer in patients with PWS, Davies et al. (2003) conducted a retrospective questionnaire survey of its occurrence among patients registered with the PWS Association compared with cases in the general US population based on the SEER program. The median age of 1,024 PWS patients was 19.0 years (range, 0.1-63 years) with 2 older than age 50. The ratio of observed (8) to expected (4.8) cancers was 1.67 (p = 0.1610; 95% CI = 0.72-3.28). Three myeloid leukemias were confirmed, resulting in a ratio of observed to expected of 40.18 (p = 0.0001; 95% CI = 8.0-117). The authors speculated that a gene within the 15q11-q13 region may be involved in the biology of myeloid leukemia or that secondary manifestations of PWS, such as obesity, may be associated with an increased risk of certain cancers.
Wey et al. (2005) described a woman with features consistent with PWS due to a mosaic imprinting defect. Three independent assays revealed a reduced proportion of nonmethylated SNURF-SNRPN alleles in peripheral blood DNA. Microsatellite analysis and FISH revealed apparently normal chromosomes 15 of biparental origin. Wey et al. (2005) estimated that approximately 50% of the patient's blood cells had an imprinting defect. Apart from a rather normal facial appearance, the proband had typical features of PWS in terms of truncal obesity, small hands with tapered fingers, and small feet. Operation for strabismus had been performed. When evaluated at 21 years of age, she presented with the major signs of PWS, except for the relatively normal facial appearance. Wey et al. (2005) suggested that the patient, although presenting with atypical PWS features at birth and in infancy, had progressively acquired more pronounced PWS features during childhood and adolescence.
Sinnema et al. (2012) reported the clinical features of 12 patients over the age of 50 years with genetically confirmed PWS. Eleven patients lived in a facility, and 1 lived with his elderly mother. Half of the patients had diabetes mellitus with an average age at diagnosis of 41.6 years. Three patients had hypertension, 3 had a history of stroke, 6 had a history of fractures, 10 had foot problems, 5 had scoliosis, 9 had edema, and 6 had erysipelas. Older patients had significantly lower functioning, particularly in activities of daily living, compared to younger control patients, and the decline began around age 40. All 8 patients with maternal uniparental disomy used psychotropic medications, 7 of whom had a psychiatric disorder. None of the 4 patients with a paternal deletion had a psychiatric illness. Sinnema et al. (2012) suggested that age-associated medical problems may be exacerbated by temperature instability, decreased mobility, and high pain threshold in PWS. Overall, the constellation of features suggested premature aging in PWS, which may also result from abnormalities in sex hormone levels. Sinnema et al. (2012) noted that the life expectancy of individuals with PWS had increased in recent years, and that these individuals have specific medical and social needs as they age.
To examine survival trends and risk factors in PWS, Manzardo et al. (2018) performed a survival analysis of the Prader-Willi Syndrome Association's 40-year mortality syndrome-specific database of 486 deaths. They compared 331 deaths that occurred between the years 2000 and 2015 (Recent) with 94 deaths that occurred before 2000 (Early). The risk for all-cause mortality in PWS was 1.5 (95% CI = 1.2-1.9) times higher for the Early than for the Recent cohort, reflected in female cardiac failure (hazard ratio (HR) = 1.8; 95% CI = 1.3-2.6), pulmonary embolism (HR = 6.1; 95% CI = 1.7-22), and gastrointestinal-related (HR = 3.2; 95% CI = 1.1-7.4) causes. Accidental deaths in males increased in the Recent cohort (HR = 5.7; 95% CI = 1.2-27.1), possibly due to enhanced weight management and mobility. Risk of death from respiratory failure was unchanged.
Butler et al. (2017) reviewed causes of death in Prader-Willi syndrome using the US Prader-Willi Syndrome Association 40-year mortality survey ranging from 1973 to 2015. A total of 486 deaths were reported (263 males, 217 females, 6 unknown) between 1973 and 2015, with mean age of 29.5 +/- 16 years (2 months-67 years); 70% occurred in adulthood. Respiratory failure was the most common cause, accounting for 31% of all deaths. Males were at increased risk for presumed hyperphagia-related accidents/injuries and cardiopulmonary factors compared to females. PWS maternal disomy 15 genetic subtype showed an increased risk of death from cardiopulmonary factors compared to the deletion subtype.
Prader-Willi-like Syndrome Associated with Chromosome 6
Fryns et al. (1986) described an 8-month-old girl with a de novo 5q/6q autosomal translocation resulting in loss of the distal part of the long arm of chromosome 6 (6q23.3-qter). Clinical manifestations included abnormal facies with broad, flat nasal bridge, small nose with broad tip, bilateral epicanthus, narrow palpebral fissures, small anteverted ears, and small mouth. Other features included truncal obesity, short hands and feet, and delayed psychomotor development. Prader-Willi syndrome was suspected initially.
Villa et al. (1995) reported a 23-month-old boy with mental and psychomotor delay, minor craniofacial abnormalities, and obesity who had a de novo interstitial deletion of chromosome 6q16.2-q21. The authors noted the phenotypic similarities to Prader-Willi syndrome. In a boy with clinical features mimicking Prader-Willi syndrome, but with a normal chromosome 15, Stein et al. (1996) found a de novo interstitial deletion of 6q22.2-q23.1. The boy showed delayed development, hypotonia, seizures, hyperactive behavior, a bicuspid aortic valve with mild aortic stenosis, small hands and feet, hypogonadism, and obesity since about 4 years of age. In a 38-year-old man with moderate to severe intellectual delay, short stature, small hands and feet, small mouth, and obesity, Smith et al. (1999) found a duplication of 6q24.3-q27. The authors noted that the phenotype showed similarities to Prader-Willi syndrome.
As reviewed by Gilhuis et al. (2000), several obese patients with cytogenetic alterations in the same region of 6q had been reported; all had in common some clinical features, including obesity, hypotonia, and developmental delays, resembling Prader-Willi syndrome. However, their behavior, facial features, and additional neurologic abnormalities, as well as a lack of cytogenetic changes or imprinting mutations on chromosome 15, clearly distinguished this PWS-like phenotype from PWS patients.
Holder et al. (2000) studied a girl with early-onset obesity and a balanced translocation between 1p22.1 and 6q16.2. At 67 months of age she weighed 47.5 kg (+9.3 SD) and was 127.2 cm tall (+3.2 SD); her weight for height was +6.3 SD. The child displayed an aggressive, voracious appetite, and the obesity was thought to be due to high intake, since measured energy expenditure was normal. However, the authors noted that apart from her obesity, there were no features suggestive of PWS. Genetic analysis of the region on chromosome 6 showed that the translocation disrupted the SIM1 gene (603128). Holder et al. (2000) hypothesized that haploinsufficiency of the SIM1 gene may be responsible for the obesity. In a boy with a Prader-Willi-like phenotype, Faivre et al. (2002) identified a deletion of chromosome 6q16.1-q21. Intrauterine growth retardation, oligohydramnios, and a left clubfoot were noted during the third trimester of pregnancy. Later, generalized obesity, slightly dysmorphic facial features, small hands and feet, clumsiness, and mental retardation were observed. Molecular analysis showed that the deletion was paternal in origin and resulted in a deletion of the SIM1 gene.



LTBP2
**Glaucoma 3, primary congenital, D, 613086 (3)**
Firasat et al. (2008) identified 2 consanguineous Pakistani families in which PCG mapped to chromosome 14q24.2-q24.3 (GLC3D). Both families were from the Punjab province. Symptoms of PCG in one family appeared in the first 3 years of life. Symptoms in the second family were present either at birth or within the first 6 weeks of life. Visual acuity was confined to light perception and/or counting fingers in both families. Bilateral buphthalmos was present in the second family.
Ali et al. (2009) described 4 unrelated consanguineous Pakistani families with primary congenital glaucoma, including the 2 reported by Firasat et al. (2008). Affected individuals had a history of tearing and photophobia either shortly after birth or within the first 3 years of life. Most had undergone multiple failed surgical procedures and had visual acuity of counting fingers or worse. Increased intraocular pressure was evident since first presentation (up to 56 mm Hg) with corneal enlargement and clouding. Affected individuals from 3 families had mild to moderate osteopenia and high-arched palate. Some affected members had ectopia lentis, and in one family marfanoid habitus with joint hypermobility and tall stature was present in affected individuals. Ali et al. (2009) also reported 8 Gypsy individuals with GLC3D.
Narooie-Nejad et al. (2009) described 2 consanguineous Iranian families with primary congenital glaucoma. The first family had 8 affected members with onset after birth or within the first 2 years of life. Ectopia lentis in both eyes was observed in 1 patient. Ectopia lentis of the right eye and keratectasia of the left eye were observed in another patient. The second family had 2 affected sibs who had onset at birth. The older sib had corneal clouding, and the younger sib had corneal clouding and enlargement.
**Microspherophakia and/or megalocornea, with ectopia lentis and with or without secondary glaucoma, 251750 (3), AR**
Microspherophakia (MSP) is a rare disease characterized by smaller and more spherical lenses than normal bilaterally, an increased anteroposterior thickness of the lens, and highly myopic eyes. Lens dislocation or subluxation may occur, leading to defective accommodation (summary by Ben Yahia et al., 2009).
Microspherophakia may occur in association with ectopia lentis and glaucoma, Marfan syndrome (MFS; 154700), and Weill-Marchesani syndrome (WMS; 277600).
Ben Yahia et al. (2009) studied a sister and brother with isolated microspherophakia from a consanguineous Tunisian family. They had no cardiovascular, musculoskeletal, or metabolic disease, and there was no family history of Marfan syndrome, Weill-Marchesani syndrome, or metabolic disease. Their parents and 4 other sibs were unaffected.
Kumar et al. (2010) studied 2 consanguineous Indian families in which there were 3 brothers and a sister and brother, respectively, with microspherophakia. The 3 brothers all had unilateral lens dislocation into the vitreous cavity. The 23-year-old female presented with blurred vision and was found to have bilateral microspherophakia and secondary glaucoma, as did her 15-year-old brother. None of the 5 affected individuals had enlarged cornea, buphthalmos, abnormal angle structures, or increased axial length, excluding a diagnosis of primary congenital glaucoma in both families. None of the patients from either family had any systemic involvement.
Desir et al. (2010) described 3 sibs, born of first-cousin Moroccan parents, who had bilateral microspherophakia and megalocornea. The proband presented at 18 months of age with impaired vision and was found to have microspherophakia with bilateral lens dislocation, megalocornea, flat irides, and iridodonesis. Eye pressures were normal, and he had axial myopia. He underwent bilateral lensectomy at 2 years of age; 4 to 5 years later he had bilateral retinal detachment, and ocular hypertension developed. A sister was examined at 10 months of age due to megalocornea; she also had microspherophakia, iridodonesis, and axial myopia, with very deep anterior chambers, miotic oval pupils without well-defined borders, and normal eye pressures. She had complete posterior lens dislocation at 6 years of age, and ocular hypertension was noted at 8 years of age. Another sister presented at 18 months of age with axial myopia, megalocornea, microspherophakia without lens dislocation, iridodonesis, iris anomalies including anterior synechiae and iris mamillations, deep anterior chambers, and normal eye pressures. At 5 years of age, she had intermittent anterior dislocation of the left lens, causing acute glaucoma crises, and she underwent emergent extraction of the lens; left retinal detachment developed a few weeks later. Progressive posterior luxation of the right lens and bilateral ocular hypertension were observed. Reexamination of the proband at 14 years of age revealed an increased arm span of 204 cm with a height of 184 cm, and a decreased upper-to-lower body ratio. His hands were normal with no arachnodactyly, and the Walker and Steinberg signs were not present; Marfan syndrome (154700) was considered, but direct analysis of the FBN1 gene (134797) revealed no mutation. His affected sisters had normal upper-to-lower body ratios. Desir et al. (2010) also reported a second family of Macedonian Gypsy descent with 1 affected girl and 1 healthy boy. The girl presented at 2 years of age with megalocornea, and examination showed patchy iris atrophy and a very flat anterior chamber, with anterosuperior dislocation of microspherophakic lenses. Fundi and eye pressures were normal at that time, and her eye pressures were still normal at 3 years of age. All affected children from both families had unremarkable skin, teeth, and gums, and their hearts, valves, and aortic roots were normal by ultrasonography.
Khan et al. (2011) reported 8 affected individuals from 3 consanguineous families with congenital megalocornea and secondary glaucoma due to spherophakia and/or ectopia lentis. The authors noted that 1 patient from each family had spontaneous complete crystalline lens dislocation into the anterior chamber with acute glaucoma during early childhood, an unusual ophthalmic presentation that had previously been most strongly associated with homocystinuria (see 236200); however, homocystinuria screening in these patients was negative. In addition, 2 of the older patients had tall stature and a high-arched palate, but none of the other affected individuals had dysmorphic features, dysmorphic body habitus, or nonocular congenital anomalies.
**?Weill-Marchesani syndrome 3, recessive, 614819 (3), AR**
Weill-Marchesani syndrome is a rare connective tissue disorder characterized by short stature, brachydactyly, joint stiffness, and lens abnormalities (Faivre et al., 2002).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of WMS, see 277600.
Haji-Seyed-Javadi et al. (2012) studied a large consanguineous Iranian family in which a brother and sister and their cousin had Weill-Marchesani syndrome, whereas 3 older sibs of the brother and sister displayed some features of WMS without meeting diagnostic criteria for the disorder. The proband was a 17-year-old boy who had ectopia lentis, myopia, elevated intraocular pressure, shallow anterior chamber, microspherophakia, short stature, brachydactyly, joint stiffness, and pulmonary and aortic stenosis. His 19-year-old sister also showed all of these features. In addition, 3 sibs had no eye findings but displayed some of the other features of WMS: a 30-year-old sister had brachydactyly, joint stiffness, and pulmonary and aortic stenosis; a 36-year-old brother had brachydactyly, joint stiffness, and pulmonary stenosis; and a 22-year-old sister had pulmonary and aortic stenosis. Their 37-year-old female cousin displayed all of the eye findings as well as brachydactyly and joint stiffness, but did not have pulmonary or aortic stenosis.
**Dental anomalies and short stature, 601216 (3), AR**
Dental anomalies and short stature (DASS) is characterized by significant short stature with brachyolmia as well as hypoplastic amelogenesis imperfecta with almost absent enamel (Huckert et al., 2015). Some patients exhibit valvular and/or vascular defects, including mitral valve prolapse, aortic root dilation, and aortic as well as other arterial aneurysms (Dugan et al., 2015; Guo et al., 2018). Inter- and intrafamilial variability has been reported.
Verloes et al. (1996) described an apparently 'new' form of skeletal dysplasia with amelogenesis imperfecta and platyspondyly in a brother and sister born of consanguineous parents. Hallmarks were amelogenesis imperfecta (absence of the enamel cap) associated with short trunk and brachyolmia-like anomalies (platyspondyly with short pedicles, narrow intervertebral and interpedicular distances, rectangular-shaped vertebrae with posterior scalloping, herniation of the nuclei, and broad femoral necks). Inheritance appeared to be autosomal recessive. The girl was 141 cm tall at age 16, with an arm span of 142 cm, a sitting height of 72 cm, and short hands. She was completely edentulous, all teeth having to be removed within a year of eruption. At the age of 12 years, the brother was 133 cm tall with sitting height of 63 cm and arm span of 134 cm. The permanent teeth were yellowish and almost completely lacking in enamel cap.
Bertola et al. (2009) described 3 affected patients (2 sibs and 1 unrelated patient), from consanguineous matings, presenting with brachyolmia with enamel defects. In the first family, the older brother had oligodontia and enamel hypoplasia; the younger brother had widely spaced permanent teeth, enamel hypoplasia, agenesis of both inferior second premolars and retention of their deciduous. In the second family, the patient had retarded eruption of permanent teeth, amelogenesis imperfecta, and taurodontic pulp chambers.
Noor et al. (2009) reported a consanguineous Pakistani family in which 5 sibs had selective tooth agenesis characterized by absence of many of the permanent teeth. Two affected males were examined in detail. Radiographs showed apparent congenital oligodontia, with absence of 23 permanent teeth in the more severely affected brother, and absence of 18 permanent teeth in the other affected brother. Fully formed impacted upper third molars were identified bilaterally, and fully formed unerupted unilateral lower second and third molars were seen; no completely or incompletely formed impacted nonmolar teeth were noted. Alveolar bone was absent where the teeth were missing, an area encompassing most of the mandible. Radiographic studies and dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) suggested that affected individuals had a higher bone mineral density in the spine, as well as an increase in bone density at the base of the skull, compared to unaffected individuals. There was apparent prognathism on lateral skull film (Figure 1). Affected individuals also had short stature with varying degrees of scoliosis, although the relationship of this finding to the genotype was unclear.
Dugan et al. (2015) reported 2 sisters of Emirati origin who had 'small and decayed' deciduous teeth, over which crowns were placed when neither had eruption of permanent teeth. Both girls had short stature, and neither responded to growth hormone (GH1; 139250) administration. Both were diagnosed with mitral valve prolapse (MVP) in childhood, and follow-up echocardiography in the teenage years showed MVP with mild insufficiency in both. Other features included hypertrichosis, especially on the back, and short first metatarsals; the older sister exhibited arachnodactyly and swan-neck deformity of the fingers on extension, whereas the younger sister had the swan-neck deformity without arachnodactyly.
Huckert et al. (2015) studied 2 sisters, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, who presented with amelogenesis imperfecta and short stature. Examination revealed facial dysmorphism, including large forehead, thick eyebrows, and almond-shaped eyes, as well as myopia and learning difficulties. Skeletal x-rays showed platyspondyly with indentations of both upper and lower vertebral endplates (brachyolmia), but there were no signs of a generalized skeletal dysplasia, and bone age was normal. Orodental evaluation revealed nearly complete absence of enamel in both primary and permanent dentitions. Teeth were yellow, small, and widely spaced, and several teeth had been extracted due to recurrent infection. On orthopantomogram, no enamel was seen, pulp chambers were large, and molars were taurodontic. Lateral skull x-rays showed somewhat thickened cortical plates of the frontal bone with absence of pneumatization of the frontal and sphenoid sinuses, as well as class III mandibular prognathism, due to maxillary underdevelopment. Huckert et al. (2015) also studied patients from 3 more families with amelogenesis imperfecta, short stature, and variable platyspondyly, including a patient originally reported by Bertola et al. (2009). Delayed tooth eruption and missing teeth were each noted in 1 family, respectively, and patients in 1 family also exhibited osteopenia and scoliosis. Huckert et al. (2015) noted that the published skull x-ray of 1 of the Pakistani family members with selective tooth agenesis studied by Noor et al. (2009) clearly showed absent enamel and short roots in the remaining teeth, suggesting a diagnosis of amelogenesis imperfecta.
Clinical Variability
Guo et al. (2018) reported 2 unrelated families with DASS and mutations in the LTBP3 gene (see MOLECULAR GENETICS), in which affected individuals also exhibited thoracic and abdominal aortic aneurysms. In the first family (family TAA909), the proband was a 54-year-old man with DASS and aortic root dilation, abdominal aortic aneurysm, and multiple visceral and peripheral arterial aneurysms. His 2 affected sisters had DASS with mild mitral valve prolapse, and 1 also showed mild aortic root dilation. In the second family (family TAA376), a brother and sister had DASS and aneurysm of the ascending aorta with dissection in the fourth decade of life, as well as involvement of the descending aorta. In the sister, aneurysmal disease extended to the abdominal aorta, and she also had cervical artery tortuosity, pulmonary artery dilation, other arterial aneurysms, and mitral valve disease. Their parents were unaffected, but 2 paternal aunts and 1 uncle had thoracic aortic aneurysm or dissection in the eighth and ninth decades of life, and 2 of the 3 were also known to have dental anomalies. Three other paternal relatives of that generation died suddenly of unknown cause in the sixth and seventh decades of life, one of whom had dental abnormalities.
**Geleophysic dysplasia 3, 617809 (3), AD**
McInerney-Leo et al. (2016) studied a mother (SKDP-4.2) and 2 sons (SKDP-4.4 and SKDP-4.3) who had short stature, brachydactyly, restricted movements in the elbow and wrist joints, and dysmorphic facial features including round face, full cheeks, well-defined eyebrows, bulbous nose, anteverted nares, and thick lips. The mother underwent emergency tracheostomy after failed intubation for cesarean section; CT scan indicated probable preexisting subglottic stenosis. In addition, the younger son had a hoarse voice and subglottic stenosis, and echocardiogram at age 16 years showed mildly thickened mitral valve with mitral regurgitation, and possible pulmonary artery stenosis; however, these results were not confirmed on cardiac MRI. The family was clinically diagnosed with acromicric dysplasia (see 102370). The authors also reported 2 unrelated boys (GD-1 and GD-2) with facial features of geleophysic dysplasia, short stature, small hands and feet, stiff joints, thick skin, dyspnea, sleep apnea, tracheolaryngeal stenosis, and hepatomegaly. Both boys developed alveolointerstitial pneumonia and died of respiratory failure, at age 4 years and age 18 months, respectively.



SOD2
**{Microvascular complications of diabetes 6}, 612634 (3)**



RIMS1
**Cone-rod dystrophy 7, 603649 (3)**
Kelsell et al. (1998) described a 4-generation British family with autosomal dominant cone-rod dystrophy. Affected members first became aware of reduced color vision and visual acuity between the ages of 20 and 40 years. As the disorder progressed, they reported difficulty seeing in bright light. At the onset of symptoms, retinal pigmentary changes were already present around the fovea, simulating a bull's eye dystrophy, and progressed to macular atrophy.
Kniazeva et al. (1999) examined 10 members of a 4-generation family segregating an autosomal dominant form of macular dystrophy and identified 5 individuals with characteristic features of cone-rod dystrophy and Stargardt disease; a sixth family member (deceased) was classified as affected by history. Most affected individuals had gradual onset of decreased visual acuity during the fourth decade, bilateral macular atrophy, diffusely abnormal ERG responses, and markedly reduced color vision. In addition, several affected individuals demonstrated features highly suggestive of Stargardt-like disease (see 248200), such as yellow 'flavimaculatus flecks' in the retinal pigment epithelium and a 'dark choroid' pattern on fluorescein angiography.



FMN2
**Mental retardation, autosomal recessive 47, 616193 (3), AR**
Law et al. (2014) reported 5 patients from 2 unrelated consanguineous families with nonsyndromic mental retardation. All patients showed delayed development, with cognition and speech more affected than motor skills. Two patients had hypotonia. Speech was limited to a few words in most patients. Two patients had controlled complex partial seizures. At 14 to 30 years of age, all except 1 were dependent for activities of daily living. Brain imaging in 2 patients was normal; there were no additional neurologic or dysmorphic features.



TYR
**Albinism, oculocutaneous, type IA, 203100 (3), AR**
Oculocutaneous albinism is a genetically heterogeneous congenital disorder characterized by decreased or absent pigmentation in the hair, skin, and eyes. The term 'albinism' includes specific ocular changes that are the results of reduced amounts of melanin in the developing eye; these abnormalities in the eye and optic system are specific and necessary for the diagnosis. Aside from decreased pigment in the iris and retina, optic changes include decreased visual acuity, misrouting of the optic nerves at the chiasm, and nystagmus (King et al., 2001).
Although OCA caused by mutations in the TYR gene was classically known as 'tyrosinase-negative' OCA, Tripathi et al. (1992) noted that some patients with 'tyrosinase-positive' OCA may indeed have TYR mutations resulting in residual enzyme activity. These patients can be classified as having OCA1B.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Oculocutaneous Albinism
OCA1, caused by mutations in the TYR gene, is divided clinically into 2 types: type IA, OCA1A, characterized by complete lack of tyrosinase activity due to production of an inactive enzyme, and type IB (OCA1B; 606952), characterized by reduced activity of tyrosinase. OCA2 (203200), OCA3 (203290), and OCA4 (606574) are somewhat milder forms of the disorder, caused by mutations in the OCA2 (611409), TYRP1 (115501), and MATP (SLC45A2; 606202) genes, respectively. OCA5 (615312) has been mapped to chromosome 4q24. OCA6 (see 113750) is caused by mutation in the SLC24A5 gene (609802). OCA7 (615179) is caused by mutation in the C10ORF11 gene (614537).
See also ocular albinism (OA1; 300500), which is restricted phenotypically to ocular involvement only.
Taylor (1978) pointed out that in the albino the ganglion cell layer does not thin out in the foveolar pit but shows a layer 6 to 8 cells thick where there should be none. He commented that 'this must degrade the retinal image....There is therefore ample reason for the uncorrectable defective central fixation, and...the ocular nystagmus, in this case of the optical variety.' In 60% of his patients he noted an abnormal head posture, which minimized the nystagmus with slight improvement in visual acuity, at least for reading. All types of conditions with oculocutaneous or ocular hypopigmentation in man and animals with nystagmus tested to date have shown either electrophysiologic or anatomic evidence of a decussation defect in the optic tracts. Patients without nystagmus do not (Witkop et al., 1982).
Evidence that anomalous decussation exists also in the auditory system was presented by Creel et al. (1980). The amount of pigment in the inner ear correlates directly with the amount in the iris; otic pigment is lacking in albinos. In homozygotes an abnormal proportion of fibers from the ganglion cells of the temporal retina decussate to the contralateral cerebral hemisphere; this can be demonstrated by monocular visual evoked potential (VEP) asymmetry (Apkarian et al., 1983).
Van Dorp (1987) suggested that patients with autosomal recessive albinism may have normal pigmentation. In a family with several albinos, they found a cousin, the offspring of a consanguineous mating, who was normally pigmented but had absence of macromelanosomes on skin biopsy as well as ocular and electrophysiologic signs of albinism. Van Dorp (1987) also concluded that patients with X-linked ocular albinism (300500, 300600) may be generally underpigmented and that patients with the Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (203300) may have a dark complexion.
Summers et al. (1991) observed striking discordance in ocular expression of albinism in 2 brothers. Both had foveal hypoplasia and misrouting of the optic fibers at the chiasm, as judged by VEP: one had strabismus and nystagmus with maximum correction of vision to 20/100, whereas the other had vision with myopic correction to 20/20 in both eyes and no nystagmus or strabismus.
Using MRI, Schmitz et al. (2003) found that the size and configuration of the optic chiasm in humans with albinism are distinctly different from the chiasms of normal control subjects. These chiasmal changes reflect the atypical crossing of the optic fibers, irrespective of the causative gene mutation. Eight patients had tyrosinase gene-related oculocutaneous albinism, 4 patients had pink-eyed dilution gene-related OCA2 (203200), 1 had ocular albinism (OA1; 300500); the albinism-causing mutation had not been identified in 4 other patients.
Summers and King (1994) described minimal pigment oculocutaneous albinism, a tyrosinase-related form of the disorder. They reported the findings in 9 patients followed for up to 11 years. Patients were born with white scalp hair and skin, and nystagmus developed. Visual acuity was reduced, but in 1 patient vision improved with maturity. The irides were blue. In 7 of the 9 patients, including the 1 patient with improved visual acuity, iris pigment developed as demonstrated by transillumination with slit-lamp biomicroscopy.
Meyer et al. (2002) found that optical coherence tomography (OCT) could be used to document foveal hypoplasia in patients with oculocutaneous albinism. In a patient with OCA, the OCT did not detect a foveal pit; instead, widespread thickening of the retina occurred throughout the entire fovea with no difference from the surrounding macula. Foveal thickness was 300 micrometers in the patient versus 150 micrometers in a normal subject. Recchia et al. (2002) also found that OCT allowed detailed examination of the macular anatomy in patients with foveal hypoplasia. Their patient's OCT data showed preservation of multiple inner retinal layers where there should have been none, indicating that the fovea was thicker than normal. The authors proposed that a more accurate term would be 'foveal dysgenesis,' and suggested that OCT might prove helpful in the evaluation of patients with unexplained visual loss.
Albinism is associated with a variety of ophthalmologic signs, including iris transillumination, nystagmus, strabismus, high refractive errors, foveal dysgenesis, chorioretinal hypopigmentation, and the 'albinotic' optic disc. Brodsky and Fray (2004) reported that a positive angle kappa is also associated with albinism in patients with congenital nystagmus. The authors suggested that this association might be related to the anomalous decussation of the optic axons that characterizes the albinotic visual system.
**Albinism, oculocutaneous, type IB, 606952 (3)**
Oculocutaneous albinism type I is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by absence of pigment in hair, skin, and eyes, and does not vary with race or age. Severe nystagmus, photophobia, and reduced visual acuity are common features. OCA type I is divided into 2 types: type IA, characterized by complete lack of tyrosinase activity due to production of an inactive enzyme, and type IB, characterized by reduced activity of tyrosinase.
Although OCA caused by mutations in the TYR gene was classically known as 'tyrosinase-negative' OCA, Tripathi et al. (1992) noted that some patients with 'tyrosinase-positive' OCA may indeed have TYR mutations resulting in residual enzyme activity. These patients can be classified as having OCA1B.
Witkop (1971) suggested that the 'yellow mutant' (ym) form of albinism first observed among the Amish (Nance et al., 1970) and later observed in non-Amish families (Witkop et al., 1971) may be distinct from both tyrosinase-positive and tyrosinase-negative albinism. As in type II albinism (203200), the homozygote is 'dead white' at birth, with serious ocular abnormalities, but rather rapidly develops normal skin pigmentation and yellow hair. The condition differs from albinism II in the yellow hair and the fact that incubation with L-tyrosine or L-DOPA yields equivocal results.
Hu et al. (1980) described 3 sisters, including monozygotic twins, with clinical, ultrastructural, and histochemical features typical of yellow mutant albinism. Classic tyrosinase-negative albinism was found in a maternal cousin of the probands. The authors suggested that the probands are genetic compounds for the yellow mutant allele and the classic albinism allele.
King et al. (1986) reported 3 families in which affected individuals had white hair and no skin or eye pigment at birth, but developed minimal amounts of pigment in the iris in the first decade of life. They had no measurable hairbulb tyrosinase activity. The authors referred to this as 'minimal pigment' type albinism. In each of the families, one parent had normal tyrosinase activity and the other abnormally low activity. King et al. (2001) stated that early descriptions of 'minimal pigment' and 'platinum'-type albinism are now considered likely to be part of the OCA1B spectrum. While most affected individuals with OCA1B have blue eyes at birth, they can develop visible light tan or brown pigment over time.
King et al. (2001) discussed changes in the optic system common to all individuals affected with oculocutaneous albinism. Melanin in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) is greatly reduced or absent, making the retina transparent; as a result, the choroidal blood vessels may be seen on ophthalmoscopic examination. Foveal hypoplasia results in reduced visual acuity, and correction of refractive errors (myopia, hyperopia, or astigmatism), which are common and significant, often improves acuity modestly. The most striking optic system change in albinism is the abnormal decussation and misrouting of the optic fibers at the chiasm, resulting in loss of stereoscopic depth perception. Asymmetric visual evoked potential, which is evidence of misrouting, is diagnostic for albinism.
Albinism is associated with a variety of ophthalmologic signs, including iris transillumination, nystagmus, strabismus, high refractive errors, foveal dysgenesis, chorioretinal hypopigmentation, and the 'albinotic' optic disc. Brodsky and Fray (2004) reported that a positive angle kappa, with the appearance of exotropia but no fixation shift on alternate cover test, is also associated with albinism in patients with congenital nystagmus. The authors suggested that this association might be related to the anomalous decussation of the optic axons that characterizes the albinotic visual system.
Temperature-Sensitive Phenotype
King et al. (1991) reported a patient with white hair in the warmer areas (scalp and axilla) and progressively darker hair in the cooler areas (extremities) of her body. Tyrosinase assay demonstrated a loss of activity above 35-37 degrees C. The authors noted that the pattern of peripheral pigmentation is analogous to the Siamese cat and the Himalayan mouse.
Ocular Albinism with Waardenburg Syndrome Type 2A
Lewis (1978) found 7 affected males and 5 affected females in 3 consecutive generations of a Caucasian kindred. As in the X-linked Nettleship-Falls form of ocular albinism (300500), the patients showed reduced visual acuity, photophobia, nystagmus, translucent irides, strabismus, hypermetropic refractive errors, and albinotic fundus with foveal hypoplasia. The skin lesions showed macromelanosomes as in X-linked ocular albinism. Deafness, which was accompanied by vestibular hypofunction, lentigines even in unexposed areas, optic nerve dysplasia, and dominant inheritance distinguished this form of ocular albinism. (In the LEOPARD syndrome (151100) vestibular function is normal.)
Bard (1978) described a kindred that was atypical of Waardenburg syndrome (see 193510) in several ways. Although the nasal root was prominent, one affected person had dystopia of the inner canthi or lower puncta. The face in some showed striking freckling of pale skin. Symptomatic vestibular disturbance was another unusual feature. Lewis (1989) expressed the opinion that the family reported by Bard (1978) as an instance of Waardenburg syndrome in fact had this disorder. Lewis (1989) had also been told of 2 other small families with the syndrome. Goldberg (1966) described a Waardenburg syndrome family with apparent ocular albinism.
Morell et al. (1997) presented an update of the clinical findings in the family of Bard (1978). The deafness was sensorineural and congenital. Heterochromia iridis was a prominent feature in 1 sibship in which both segmental iris bicolor and complete heterochromia occurred. Most of the affected individuals showed transillumination defects of the iris. Hypopigmentation of the fundus was mild in some, moderate in others, and severe in yet others. Almost all affected individuals had strabismus and visual acuity defects. One individual with a prominent white forelock, characteristic of Waardenburg syndrome, was pictured. In this family, Morell et al. (1997) identified digenic inheritance of Waardenburg syndrome and oculocutaneous albinism; see MOLECULAR GENETICS.
**[Skin/hair/eye pigmentation 3, light/dark/freckling skin], 601800 (3)**
**Waardenburg syndrome/albinism, digenic, 103470 (3), AD**



PKHD1
**Polycystic kidney disease 4, with or without hepatic disease, 263200 (3), AR**
PKD4 is an autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) characterized by enlarged, echogenic kidneys with fusiform dilatation of the collecting ducts. Most patients progress to end-stage renal disease (ESRD), but at varying ages. Patients also have liver disease consisting of dilated biliary ducts, congenital hepatic fibrosis (CHF), and portal hypertension (Caroli disease). The most typical disease expression occurs in neonates and includes a history of oligohydramnios, massively enlarged kidneys, and the 'Potter' sequence with pulmonary hypoplasia that leads to respiratory insufficiency and perinatal death in approximately 30% of affected newborns (summary by Hartung and Guay-Woodford, 2014).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of polycystic kidney disease, see PKD1 (173900).
Ward et al. (2002) briefly reviewed clinical features and classification of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). The disease presentation of ARPKD is highly variable. In infancy, the disease results in significantly enlarged echogenic polycystic kidneys, with pulmonary hypoplasia resulting from oligohydramnios as a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Liver involvement is detectable in approximately 45% of infants and is often the major feature in older patients. The pathologic findings of collecting-duct ectasia in the kidney and ductal-plate malformation in the liver indicates that the basic defect of ARPKD may be a failure of terminal differentiation in the collecting-duct and biliary systems. The variable clinical presentation led to earlier separation into different clinicopathologic groups: perinatal, neonatal, infantile, and juvenile, depending on the age of presentation and the severity of renal and liver disease (Blyth and Ockenden, 1971), suggesting different genetic entities; see HISTORY. Subsequently, evidence of intrafamilial phenotypic variability (Kaplan et al., 1988; Deget et al., 1995) and genetic linkage studies (Zerres et al., 1994; Guay-Woodford et al., 1995) suggested that a less rigid subdivision is indicated, with allelic, rather than genetic, heterogeneity explaining much of the observed variability (Zerres et al., 1998).
It has long been recognized that the age distribution of cases of polycystic kidneys has 2 peaks, one at birth and one between ages 30 to 60 years. Furthermore, most cases with the later peak show the familial pattern of an autosomal dominant (173900). Kaariainen (1987) collected information in Finland on 82 children treated during the years 1974 to 1983 for polycystic kidney disease. The frequency was about 1 per 8,000 births. Early lethal disease was present in 51, whereas 31 survived for over 28 days. The children came from 69 families. They were divided by family studies into 3 groups: autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease in 11 families, autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease in 14, and sporadic cases in 44 families. In 3 of the 'dominant' families, 2 or more sibs had manifestations of PKD neonatally. The majority of the grandparents of the children with the recessive or the sporadic form were born in the same sparsely populated areas in northern, central, and eastern Finland, which suggested that most of the sporadic cases were actually recessive PKD.
One of the notable features of both dominant and recessive PKD in humans is the variability of the phenotype, with respect to both disease progression and extrarenal manifestations. While a significant component of this variance is probably due to genetic heterogeneity, Kaplan et al. (1989) documented marked variability of clinical disease even within kindreds. Kaplan et al. (1988) presented evidence contradicting the view that perinatal, neonatal, infantile, and juvenile forms of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease represent 4 discrete entities. They described an instructive family in which a male infant presented at birth with very large cystic kidneys together with portal fibrosis and ductule proliferation in the liver, bilateral pulmonary atelectasis, large atrial septal defect, and a ventricular septal defect. Death occurred at 18 hours. An older sib presented at the age of 16 years with no symptoms because the mother wanted reassurance that the daughter had no condition similar to that of the deceased sib. Blood pressure was normal. The liver and spleen were enlarged. Ultrasonography, radiologic studies, and liver biopsy showed renal tubular ectasia and congenital hepatic fibrosis. Thus, the perinatal and juvenile forms of Blyth and Ockenden (1971) are likely to be opposite ends of the phenotypic spectrum of a single entity.
Zerres et al. (1984) gave a comprehensive review of all types of cystic kidney. They stated that evidence of so-called congenital hepatic fibrosis is 'indispensable for the diagnosis of ARPKD.' Hartung and Guay-Woodford (2014) noted that although histologic biliary abnormalities are a universal feature of ARPKD, clinical expression varies widely. In various cohorts, the proportion of ARPKD patients with imaging findings of liver disease has ranged from 45 to 90%.
Gross cystic dilatation of the intrahepatic biliary tree is usually called Caroli disease (congenital biliary ectasia, or nonobstructive intrahepatic bile duct dilatation; see 600643); its frequent association with ARPKD is well established (Bernstein et al., 1975). Caroli disease is a rare cause of chronic cholestasis and hepatolithiasis in young adults. Ros et al. (1993) reported results of treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) in 12 patients with Caroli disease and intrahepatic stones. The duodenal bile of these patients contained cholesterol crystals which suggested that the stones were cholesterol rich. UDCA led to sustained clinical remission, return to normal liver function, and dissolution of intrahepatic stones on ultrasound in all patients. Tsuchida et al. (1995) described Caroli disease in a brother and sister whose asymptomatic father was shown to have the same disease by CT scan. They suggested that the mode of inheritance in this family and in many other instances is autosomal dominant, not autosomal recessive. The sister had undergone laparotomy at the age of 5 years because of hepatomegaly and mottled radiopacities shown by cholangiography. With medical management she remained in good health for the next 21 years. Mottled radiopacities of the hepatic parenchyma were demonstrated by cholangiography in her 9-year-old brother at the time the diagnosis of Caroli disease was made in the sister. He remained asymptomatic, however, until hematemesis due to esophageal varices occurred 21 years later at the age of 30 years. While their healthy father was at that time shown to have the same disease by CT scan, the mother of the affected sibs had a completely normal intrahepatic biliary tree by intravenous cholangiography. Presumably, there was no cystic involvement of the kidneys in any of the 3 affected members of the family. If Caroli disease is defined simply as polycystic dilatation of intrahepatic bile ducts with hepatic fibrosis, it is likely that not all cases have this disorder as part of either infantile or adult polycystic kidney disease. It is possible that some cases represent a distinct entity of isolated hepatic fibrosis with cysts and that some of these represent a distinct genetic entity in its own right (see 600643). However, Adeva et al. (2006) concluded that relatively isolated congenital hepatic fibrosis and/or Caroli disease are part of the ARPKD spectrum.
Deget et al. (1995) observed 42 children from 20 sibships with ARPKD, pro- and retrospectively, over a mean period of 3.7 years. Using the subclassification of Blyth and Ockenden (1971), they assigned 12 patients to the perinatal, 9 to the neonatal, 13 to the infantile, and 8 to the juvenile category. In 11 of the 20 families, different subtypes were observed among affected sibs; in 7 families, affected sibs belonged to adjacent subgroups, while major intrafamilial differences were observed in 4 families. The phenotypic manifestations ranged from stillbirths to mildly affected adults, while intrafamilial variability of the clinical picture was generally small with multiple allelism as the most likely genetic explanation. Age at death showed gross variation in 8 sibships. Sex influence could not explain the differences in clinical course between sibs.
Blickman et al. (1995) reported the sonographic changes in renal function seen on long-term follow-up of children who had the initial diagnosis of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease made in the neonatal period. The evaluation involved 14 children with biopsy evidence of the disease; 9 children who survived the neonatal period were followed up for a mean of 13 years (range, 5-19 years) after diagnosis. They found that kidney size as seen on sonograms did not continue to increase despite the patients' linear growth and maintained normal renal function. Rather, a decrease in kidney size and change in echogenicity occurred, producing a pattern similar to that seen on sonograms of patients with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease but without the marked increase in kidney size that occurs in that entity. The authors thought that the changing cystic pattern on follow-up sonograms may have been the reason that previous descriptions have varied and why a decrease in size may not herald deteriorating renal function.
Coffman (2002) commented on the elucidation of autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease by Ward et al. (2002). They published photographs of gross and microscopic views of a specimen from a patient with ARPKD showing the typical pattern of fusiform, cylindrical channels occupying most of the kidney parenchyma and representing massively dilated terminal branches of collecting ducts. A photomicrograph showed the radially oriented, fusiform cysts characteristic of ARPKD.
Bosch et al. (2003) described clinical and renal function stabilization in a 3-year-old Turkish female who survived neonatal onset without hepatic fibrosis, thereby illustrating that prognostication should be cautious even with severe neonatal presentation.
Guay-Woodford and Desmond (2003) analyzed the largest single group of patients with ARPKD (The ARPKD Clinical Database) which was divided into a younger cohort of 166 patients born after January 1, 1990 (median age 5.4 years, 45.8% detected prenatally) and an older cohort of 43 patients born before 1990 biased for long-term survival (median age 14 years, 5.6% detected prenatally). They found a slower rate of disease progression in the older cohort, as assessed by age of ARPKD diagnosis, as well as age of diagnosis of clinical morbidities. Neonatal ventilation was strongly predictive of mortality as well as an earlier age of diagnosis in those who developed systemic hypertension and chronic renal insufficiency. However, for those who survived the perinatal period, the long-term prognosis for survival was much better than generally perceived; 1- and 5-year survival was approximately 90% for those who survived the first month of life. Portal hypertension was not correlated with age at diagnosis, and only a small subset of patients developed clinically significant periportal fibrosis.
Bergmann et al. (2005) examined the clinical course of 164 neonatal survivors out of 186 ARPKD patients from 126 unrelated families. The mean observation period was 6 years (range, 0-35 years), and the 1- and 10-year survival rates were 85% and 82%, respectively. Chronic renal failure was first detected at a mean age of 4 years, with actuarial renal survival rates of 86% at 5 years, 71% at 10 years, and 42% at 20 years. All but 6 patients (92%) had a kidney length on or above the 97th centile for age. About 75% of the study population developed systemic hypertension. Sequelae of congenital hepatic fibrosis and portal hypertension developed in 44% of patients and were related to age. Positive correlations observed between renal and hepatobiliary-related morbidity suggested uniform disease progression rather than organ-specific patterns. Bergmann et al. (2005) noted that missense changes were more frequently observed among patients with a milder clinical course, whereas chain-terminating mutations were more commonly associated with a severe phenotype.
Adeva et al. (2006) commented that the autosomal recessive form of polycystic kidney disease had generally been considered an infantile disorder with typical presentation of greatly enlarged echogenic kidneys detected in utero or within the neonatal period, often resulting in neonatal demise; however, there was an increasing realization that survivors often thrived into adulthood with complications of ductal plate malformation, manifesting as congenital hepatic fibrosis and Caroli disease, becoming prominent. Adeva et al. (2006) retrospectively reviewed the clinical records, and where possible performed PKHD1 mutation screening, in patients diagnosed with ARPKD or congenital hepatic fibrosis at the Mayo Clinic in the period 1961 to 2004. Of 133 cases reviewed, 65 were considered to meet the diagnostic criteria, with an average duration of follow-up of 8.6 +/- 6.4 years. ARPKD was present in 55 cases and 10 had isolated congenital hepatic fibrosis with no or minimal renal involvement. The patients were analyzed in 3 groups categorized by the age at diagnosis: less than 1 year (22 patients), 1 to 20 years (23 patients), and more than 20 years (20 patients). The presenting feature in the neonates was typically associated with renal enlargement, but in the older groups more often involved manifestations of liver disease, including hepatosplenomegaly, hypersplenism, variceal bleeding, and cholangitis. During follow-up, 22 patients had renal insufficiency and 8 developed end-stage renal disease (ESRD), most from the neonatal group. Liver disease was evident on follow-up in all diagnostic groups but particularly prevalent in those diagnosed later in life. In all, 12 patients died, 6 in the neonatal period, but 86% of patients were alive at 40 years of age. The likelihood of being alive without ESRD differed significantly between the diagnostic groups with 36%, 80%, and 88% survival in the 3 groups, respectively, 20 years after the diagnosis. Considerable intrafamilial phenotypic variability was observed. Mutation analysis was performed in 31 families and at least 1 mutation was detected in 25 (81%), with 76% mutant alleles detected in those cases. Consistent with the relatively mild disease manifestations in this group of patients, most of the mutations were missense (79%) and no case had 2 truncating changes. Mutations were detected in all diagnostic groups, indicating that congenital hepatic fibrosis with minimal kidney involvement can result from PKHD1 mutation. No mutations were detected in 6 cases.



ESR1
**Breast cancer, somatic, 114480 (3)**
Breast cancer (referring to mammary carcinoma, not mammary sarcoma) is histopathologically and almost certainly etiologically and genetically heterogeneous. Important genetic factors have been indicated by familial occurrence and bilateral involvement.
Cady (1970) described a family in which 3 sisters had bilateral breast cancer. Together with reports in the literature, this suggested to him the existence of families with a particular tendency to early-onset, bilateral breast cancer. The genetic basis might, of course, be multifactorial.
Anderson (1974) concluded that the sisters of women with breast cancer whose mothers also had breast cancer have a risk 47 to 51 times that in control women; a revised estimate was 39 times (Anderson, 1976). The disease in these women usually developed before menopause, was often bilateral, and seemed to be associated with ovarian function. About 30% of daughters with early-onset, bilateral breast cancer inherited the susceptibility. The risk of breast cancer to women with affected relatives is higher when the diagnosis is made at an early age and when the disease is bilateral. Ottman et al. (1983) provided tables that give the cumulative risk of breast cancer to mothers and sisters at various ages. The highest risk group is sisters of premenstrual probands with bilateral disease. Among the sisters of women with breast cancer, Anderson and Badzioch (1985) found the highest lifetime risks when the proband had bilateral disease, an affected mother (25 +/- 7.2%), or an affected sister (28 +/- 11%). The risks were reduced to 18 +/- 3.3% and 14 +/- 2.6%, respectively, with unilateral disease. An early example of familial breast cancer was provided by Broca (1866). According to the pedigree drawn by Lynch (1976), 10 women in 4 generations of the family of Broca's wife died of breast cancer. Eisinger et al. (1998) called attention to an even earlier report of hereditary breast cancer by Le Dran (1757), who related the experience of a colleague in Avignon who had diagnosed a 19-year-old nun with cancer of the right breast. The patient refused a mastectomy not only because of the pain of surgery, but also because of a belief that the operation would be futile. Her grandmother and a grandmaternal uncle died with breast cancer, and she was convinced that this malady was hereditary and that 'her blood was corrupted by a cancerous ferment natural to her family.'
Two families with an extraordinary incidence of male breast cancer and father-to-son transmission of same was reported by Everson et al. (1976). They found a suggestion of elevated urinary estrogen in 3 of the affected males. Teasdale et al. (1976) described breast cancer in 2 brothers and in a daughter of 1 brother. Kozak et al. (1986) reported breast cancer in 2 related males, an uncle and nephew. In this family and in several reported families with male breast cancer, Kozak et al. (1986) found women in the same family with breast cancer.
Soft tissue sarcomas are associated with breast cancer in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Mulvihill (1982) used the term cancer family syndrome of Lynch (120435) for the association of colon and endometrial carcinoma and other neoplasms including breast cancer.
Seltzer et al. (1990) concluded that dermatoglyphics can help in the identification of women either with or at risk for breast cancer. They found that the presence of 6 or more whorls is associated in a statistically significant manner with breast cancer.
Marger et al. (1975) presented the cases of 2 brothers with breast cancer and reviewed the courses of 28 other previously unreported male patients. In one of the brothers, breast cancer was preceded by prostate cancer and estrogen administration, raising the possibility that the breast cancer was a metastatic deposit. The possibility of prostatic metastases was raised in 2 other patients. Demeter et al. (1990) reported breast cancer in a 64-year-old man who had had bilateral gynecomastia since childhood. His maternal grandfather had been found to have adenocarcinoma of the breast at the age of 65. His maternal grandmother had radical mastectomy for breast cancer at the age of 66 and 2 years later underwent radiation therapy for rib metastases. The proband's sister developed breast cancer at the age of 31 years and despite aggressive therapy died 1 year later with extensive metastases.
Hauser et al. (1992) reported a family in which 2 females and 2 males in 2 generations had breast cancer. Two females in the family had prophylactic bilateral mastectomy at a young age. One male developed a left breast mass and axillary node at age 59 and died of metastatic disease at age 62. His paternal uncle presented at age 57 years with bleeding from his right breast. Biopsy suggested Paget disease of the breast and he underwent mastectomy. He subsequently died at age 75 years of prostatic carcinoma. He had a daughter who developed breast cancer at age 27 years and died at age 30 with disseminated disease, and a son who developed infiltrating grade 4 adenocarcinoma of the breast at age 54.
**Estrogen resistance, 615363 (3), AR**
Estrogen resistance (ESTRR) is characterized by absence of puberty with elevated estradiol and gonadotropic hormones, as well as markedly delayed bone maturation. Female patients show absent breast development, small uterus, and enlarged multicystic ovaries; male patients may show small testes (Bernard et al., 2017). Some patients exhibit continued growth into adulthood (Smith et al., 1994).
Smith et al. (1994) described a 28-year-old man with estrogen resistance. He was 204 cm tall and had incomplete epiphyseal closure, with a history of continued linear growth into adulthood despite otherwise normal pubertal development. He was normally masculinized and had bilateral axillary acanthosis nigricans. Serum estradiol and estrone concentrations were elevated, and serum testosterone concentrations were normal. Serum follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone concentrations were increased. Glucose tolerance was impaired and hyperinsulinemia was present. Bone mineral density of the lumbar spine was 3.1 SD below the mean for age-matched normal women; there was no biochemical evidence of increased bone turnover. Administration of estrogen had no detectable effect. Smith et al. (1994) concluded that estrogen is important for bone maturation and mineralization in men as well as in women.
Sudhir et al. (1997) presented further clinical and laboratory findings from the man originally reported by Smith et al. (1994). Electron-beam CT scanning of the patient at age 31 years showed evidence of early atherosclerosis in the left anterior descending coronary artery. Abnormal serum lipid concentrations were thought to reflect estrogen insensitivity. The authors concluded that the absence of functional estrogen receptors might be a novel risk factor for coronary artery disease in men.
Smith et al. (2008) performed a follow-up of the propositus with a homozygous nonsense mutation in ESR1 (see MOLECULAR GENETICS) originally reported by Smith et al. (1994), combined with an assessment of the effect of heterozygosity on spine density and adult height in members of his extended kindred. Patient bone biopsy revealed marked osteopenia, low trabecular volume, decreased thickness, normal trabecular number, and low activation frequency. Trabecular and cortical volumetric bone densities were markedly lower than controls. Heterozygous mutation carriers had mean spine aBMD Z scores that were significantly less than zero (p = 0.003), but spine aBMD Z scores were similar among carrier and noncarrier family members. The authors concluded that homozygous ESR1 disruption markedly affects bone growth, mineral content, and structure, but not periosteal circumference, whereas heterozygosity for ESR1 mutations appears not to impair areal spine BMD.
Quaynor et al. (2013) studied an 18-year-old woman who presented at 15 years of age with absent breast development, primary amenorrhea, and intermittent lower abdominal pain. Examination revealed Tanner stage 1 breast development and Tanner stage 4 pubic hair, and she also had severe facial acne. She was found to have markedly elevated serum levels of estrogens, with a plasma estradiol level 10 times that of the normal value, and had a bone age of 11 to 12 years at a chronologic age of 15.5 years. Ultrasonography revealed a small uterus with no clearly identifiable endometrial stripe and markedly enlarged multicystic ovaries. Growth velocity indicated the lack of an estrogen-induced growth spurt at the time of puberty. At the age of 17.75 years, plain x-rays of her left hand showed a bone age of 13.5 years and open radial and ulnar epiphyses. MRI of the brain and pituitary was normal. She had no breast development after 5 months of receiving oral estrogen, and her normal serum levels of sex-hormone-binding globulin, corticosteroid-binding globulin, thyroxine-binding globulin, prolactin and triglycerides, all of which are known to be increased by estrogen, provided further evidence of estrogen resistance. Unlike the male patient with estrogen resistance reported by Smith et al. (1994), who had hyperinsulinemia, she had normal levels of fasting glucose, insulin, and glycated hemoglobin, and a normal HOMA-IR, indicating no impaired glucose tolerance.
Bernard et al. (2017) reported 3 sibs from a consanguineous Algerian family with estrogen resistance. The proband was a 25-year-old 46,XX woman who presented with primary amenorrhea and absent breast development; pelvic ultrasonography showed bilateral enlarged multicystic ovaries and small uterus with thin endometrium. She had an extremely high 17-beta-estradiol level as well as elevated gonadotropins. Her 21-year-old 46,XX sister also showed no breast development and had primary amenorrhea. In addition, their 18-year-old 46,XY brother had Tanner stage I gonadal development, with a cryptorchid right testis and left testis volume of less than 1 cm. All 3 patients exhibited markedly delayed bone maturation. Their first-cousin parents had normal pubertal development at 15 years of age, and an unaffected sister had normal puberty with menarche at age 14 years.
**{Migraine, susceptibility to}, 157300 (3), AD**
Migraine is the most common type of chronic, episodic headache, as summarized by Featherstone (1985).
One locus for migraine with or without aura (MGR1) has been identified on chromosome 4q24. Other loci for migraine have been identified on 6p21.1-p12.2 (MGR3; 607498), 14q21.2-q22.3 (MGR4; 607501), 19p13 (MGR5; 607508), 1q31 (MGR6; 607516), 15q11-q13 (MGR7; 609179), 5q21 (with or without aura, MGR8, 609570; with aura, MGR9, 609670), 17p13 (MGR10; 610208), 18q12 (MGR11; 610209), 10q22-q23 (MGR12; 611706), and the X chromosome (MGR2; 300125).
Mutation in the KCNK18 gene (613655) on chromosome 10q25 causes migraine with aura (MGR13; 613656).
A subtype of autosomal dominant migraine with aura (MA), familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM; see 141500), is caused by mutation in the CACNA1A gene (601011) on chromosome 19p13 (FHM1; 141500), by mutation in the ATP1A2 gene (182340) on chromosome 1q21 (FHM2; 602481), or by mutation in the SCN1A gene (182389) on chromosome 2q24 (FHM3; 609634). Another locus for FHM has been mapped to chromosome 1q31 (FHM4; see 607516).
There is evidence that a polymorphism in the estrogen receptor gene (ESR1; 133430.0005) and a polymorphism in the TNF gene (191160.0004) may confer susceptibility to migraine. A polymorphism in the endothelin receptor type A gene (EDNRA; 131243.0001) may confer resistance to migraine.
Most cases of migraine are of the mild rather than the classic type, which has prodromal neurologic deficit and severe, focal head pain. Since no biochemical marker for migraine has been found, migraine and its variants remain a clinical diagnosis (Featherstone, 1985). Refsum (1968), Raskin (1988), and Miller (1991) provided extensive reviews of all aspects of migraine.
In a study of 532 persons with migraine, Stewart et al. (2006) found that the relative risk (RR) of migraine in first-degree relatives was significantly increased (RR of 1.88) compared to controls. The RR of migraine was even higher for relatives of probands with onset before age 16 years (RR of 2.50) and with more severe pain (RR of 2.38). The results suggested higher levels of familial aggregation of migraines in those with earlier onset and more severe pain scores.
In a population-based case-control study of 140 Icelandic children with seizures and 180 controls, Ludvigsson et al. (2006) found that migraine with aura conferred an odds ratio of 8.1 for subsequent development of unprovoked seizures (see, e.g., idiopathic generalized epilepsy, EIG; 600669). Migraine without aura did not increase the risk for seizures. The prevalence of both types of migraine was 20.2% in children with seizures and 6.9% in controls. The findings were consistent with the hypothesis that migraine with aura and migraine without aura are separate disease entities, and suggested that migraine with aura and seizures may share a common pathogenesis.
**{Myocardial infarction, susceptibility to}, 608446 (3)**



RARB
**Microphthalmia, syndromic 12, 615524 (3), AR, AD**
Chitayat et al. (2007) described 3 deceased sibs, born to nonconsanguineous parents of French Canadian and English descent, with bilateral microphthalmia, pulmonary hypoplasia, and diaphragmatic hernia, who also exhibited mild facial dysmorphism with broad nasal root and tip and micrognathia. The female infant also had a small bicornuate uterus and cleft palate, and 1 of the male sibs had unfixed malrotated bowel. An earlier pregnancy had resulted in death due to presumed tangled cord, but was strongly suspected to represent the same syndrome. Chitayat et al. (2007) also reported an unrelated living child, a 9.5-year-old boy born to nonconsanguineous French parents, who had bilateral severe microphthalmia and underwent repair of a left diaphragmatic hernia at 2 months of age; lung CT scan did not show pulmonary hypoplasia, and pulmonary function tests at 19 months of age showed normal lung capacity. Dysmorphic features included sparse hair, brachycephaly, deep-set orbits, short palpebral fissures, and flat nasal bridge. He had severe language delay and was wheelchair-bound due to truncal hypotonia with spastic tetraparesis.



TBCK
**Hypotonia, infantile, with psychomotor retardation and characteristic facies 3, 616900 (3), AR**
Infantile hypotonia with psychomotor retardation and characteristic facies-3 is a severe autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder with onset at birth or in early infancy. Most affected individuals show very poor, if any, normal psychomotor development, poor speech, and inability to walk independently (summary by Bhoj et al., 2016).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of infantile hypotonia with psychomotor retardation and characteristic facies, see IHPRF1 (615419).
Chong et al. (2016) reported 5 children from 4 unrelated families with profound developmental disability with little progression beyond infancy, and severe hypotonia resulting in respiratory insufficiency and feeding tube placement. The patients ranged from 2 to 14 years in age. Two patients were from a consanguineous Lebanese family, 1 was from a consanguineous Egyptian family and had a similarly affected deceased sib, and 2 were unrelated and of Puerto Rican descent. Common dysmorphic facial features included bitemporal narrowing, arched eyebrows, deep-set eyes, high nasal bridge with anteverted nares, and Cupid bow. Three patients had coarse facial features, 2 had macroglossia, and 2 had gingival hyperplasia. Other features included decreased or absent reflexes, seizures, and cortical visual impairment. Brain imaging showed ventriculomegaly and cerebral atrophy, decreased cortical gray and white matter volume, thinning of the corpus callosum, small basal ganglia, cerebellar hypoplasia, and periventricular white matter abnormalities. Two first cousins had evidence of an axonal neuropathy and 2 additional patients had decreased activities of mitochondrial respiratory chain enzymes in muscle.
Bhoj et al. (2016) reported 13 patients from 9 unrelated families with IHPRF. The patients ranged from 2 to 12 years in age; 2 sibs had previously been reported by Alazami et al. (2015). The patients presented at birth with severe hypotonia, mostly with reduced reflexes, and severely delayed psychomotor development; most did not achieve independent walking and had delayed speech acquisition. Three had respiratory insufficiency and 5 had seizures. Most had variable dysmorphic facial features, such as sloped forehead, macrocephaly, bulbous nose, tented upper lip, and coarse features with macroglossia. Brain imaging in most patients showed diffuse brain atrophy, enlarged ventricles, thin corpus callosum, and periventricular white matter abnormalities. However, 2 unrelated patients were slightly less affected and had mild cognitive impairment with normal or only mildly abnormal brain imaging findings.



PCLO
**?Pontocerebellar hypoplasia, type 3, 608027 (3), AR**
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia (PCH) refers to a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by an abnormally small cerebellum and brainstem. Clinical features vary, but usually include severe developmental delay, dysmorphic features, seizures, and early death (summary by Durmaz et al., 2009).
For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of PCH, see PCH1 (607596).
Rajab et al. (2003) described a unique form of PCH, which they called cerebellar atrophy with progressive microcephaly (CLAM), in 3 sibs of a consanguineous family from the Sultanate of Oman. All 3 patients had microcephaly and generalized hypotonia at birth and developed seizures within the first year of life. There was severe developmental delay. Craniofacial features included brachycephaly, prominent eyes, and low-set ears. One patient had thoracic scoliosis, contractures of the elbows and knees, and clubfoot. Neurologically, all had truncal hypotonia and exaggerated deep tendon reflexes. One patient had optic atrophy. Imaging studies of the brain showed small brainstem, small cerebellar vermis, and atrophy of the cerebellum and cerebrum. Rajab et al. (2003) concluded that the disorder in this family most closely resembled PCH type 2 (see 277470), although there was no extrapyramidal involvement or dyskinesia. They distinguished the disorder from progressive encephalopathy with edema, hypsarrhythmia, and optic atrophy (260565) and from cerebellar ataxia with mental retardation, optic atrophy, and skin abnormalities (606937). Rajab et al. (2003) suggested that the disorder resembled that reported by Zelnik et al. (1996), in which 3 patients had severe pontocerebellar atrophy with progressive microcephaly, hypotonia, visual impairment, and delayed psychomotor development, without dyskinesias.
Durmaz et al. (2009) reported a 3-year-old Turkish girl, born of consanguineous parents, with PCH and progressive microcephaly. She had severe developmental delay, hypotonia, seizures, and dysmorphic features, including wide palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, hypoplastic nares, full cheeks, long philtrum, depressed nasal bridge, downturned corners of the mouth, high palate, and large low-set ears. Her limbs showed increased tone. MRI showed hypoplasia of the cerebellum, brainstem, and cerebrum, associated with hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. Visual evoked potentials revealed unilateral optic atrophy, and brainstem auditory evoked potentials indicated unilateral hearing impairment.



CLCNKB
**Bartter syndrome, type 3, 607364 (3), AR**
Bartter syndrome refers to a group of disorders that are unified by autosomal recessive transmission of impaired salt reabsorption in the thick ascending loop of Henle with pronounced salt wasting, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, and hypercalciuria. Clinical disease results from defective renal reabsorption of sodium chloride in the thick ascending limb (TAL) of the Henle loop, where 30% of filtered salt is normally reabsorbed (Simon et al., 1997).
Patients with antenatal (or neonatal) forms of Bartter syndrome (e.g., BARTS1, 601678) typically present with premature birth associated with polyhydramnios and low birth weight and may develop life-threatening dehydration in the neonatal period. Patients with classic Bartter syndrome present later in life and may be sporadically asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic (summary by Simon et al., 1996 and Fremont and Chan, 2012).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Bartter Syndrome
Antenatal Bartter syndrome type 1 (601678) is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the butmetanide-sensitive Na-K-2Cl cotransporter NKCC2 (SLC12A1; 600839). Antenatal Bartter syndrome type 2 (241200) is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the ATP-sensitive potassium channel ROMK (KCNJ1; 600359). One form of neonatal Bartter syndrome with sensorineural deafness, Bartter syndrome type 4A (602522), is caused by mutation in the BSND gene (606412). Another form of neonatal Bartter syndrome with sensorineural deafness, Bartter syndrome type 4B (613090), is caused by simultaneous mutation in both the CLCNKA (602024) and CLCNKB (602023) genes.
Also see autosomal dominant hypocalcemia-1 with Bartter syndrome (601198), which is sometimes referred to as Bartter syndrome type 5 (Fremont and Chan, 2012), caused by mutation in the CASR gene (601199).
See Gitelman syndrome (GTLMN; 263800), which is often referred to as a mild variant of Bartter syndrome, caused by mutation in the thiazide-sensitive sodium-chloride cotransporter SLC12A3 (600968).
Bartter syndrome (Bartter et al., 1962) is an unusual form of secondary hyperaldosteronism in which hypertrophy and hyperplasia of the juxtaglomerular cells are associated with normal blood pressure and hypokalemic alkalosis in the absence of edema. The primary defect resides in active chloride reabsorption in the loop of Henle. The features are short stature, hyperactive renin-angiotensin system, lack of effect of angiotensin on blood pressure, renal potassium wasting, increased renal prostaglandin production, and occasionally hypomagnesemia.
Arant et al. (1970) reported 2 brothers with features of Bartter syndrome but with severe azotemia at the onset and in one of them renal osteodystrophy. Renal biopsy showed only mild hyperplasia of juxtaglomerular cells and severe glomerulonephritis. Most of the patients have shown retardation of growth and mental development, but the patient of Tarm et al. (1973) represented an exception. Erkelens and Statius van Eps (1973) described a patient with erythrocytosis in addition to the Bartter syndrome. They interpreted this as evidence that both renin and erythropoietin are produced in the juxtaglomerular apparatus. Dillon et al. (1979) studied 10 affected children, 2 of whom were sibs. Severity varied widely. Ages varied from 3 months to 15 years; sex distribution was equal. Hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, rickets, and urine acidification defects were seen in some patients. Indomethacin effected remarkable clinical and biochemical improvement. Simopoulos (1979) observed a delayed growth spurt in Bartter syndrome resulting in attainment of normal stature. Two-thirds of the children have some degree of mental retardation.
The relation of the disorder reported by De Jong et al. (1980) to the Bartter syndrome was unclear. They studied an adult brother and sister with hyperaldosteronism and hyperkalemia who differed from cases of Bartter syndrome in the presence of hypertension. Response to indomethacin suggested excessive prostaglandin production which may have been primary. The sibs also showed tachycardia.
Ramos et al. (1980) demonstrated that the Bartter syndrome can be simulated by habitual vomiting, as in anorexia nervosa. Renal biopsy showed hyperplasia of the juxtaglomerular apparatus. Hyperkalemic alkalosis, normotensive hyperreninism, hyperaldosteronism, increased levels of urinary and plasma prostaglandin E (PGE), and vascular hyporesponsivity to angiotensin II were features identical to those of idiopathic Bartter syndrome, but unlike that disorder the patient showed low urinary chloride and no increase in the fractional chloride clearance. Any process that leads to hypokalemia can result in the Bartter syndrome. Wolfsdorf and Senior (1980) reported pseudo-Bartter syndrome in 2 infants fed exclusively with soybean-based formula which as a result of a manufacturing error was severely deficient in chloride.
In studies of 3 sibs, a boy and 2 girls aged 17, 11, and 18 years, Stoff et al. (1980) found a defect in platelet aggregation. They suggested that this may be caused by an increase in plasma cAMP resulting from excessive prostaglandins. Increased renal synthesis of these long chain fatty acids is presumably responsible for many features of the syndrome: vascular insensitivity, impaired urinary concentrating ability, and obligatory renal sodium loss. O'Regan et al. (1979) had demonstrated that presumed obligatory heterozygotes (parents) have impairment of epinephrine-induced platelet aggregation, thought to reflect an abnormality of prostaglandin metabolism. Furthermore, a circulating inhibitor of platelet aggregation, probably a prostaglandin, was found. The inhibition of platelet aggregation was aggravated by salt depletion (Stoff et al., 1980) although renal features improved. Baehler et al. (1980) reported a 43-year-old man with Bartter syndrome who had suffered from generalized weakness, muscle cramps, and chest pain since his teens, with aggravation of these symptoms in the previous 6 months. Family information was not provided.
Kurtz et al. (1981) described a family in which 5 of 9 sibs (aged 20 to 30 years) had bilateral nephrocalcinosis, hypercalciuria, chronic chloride-resistant renal metabolic alkalosis, and hypokalemia due to renal wasting. Creatinine clearance was little reduced. Plasma renin activity and urinary aldosterone excretion were abnormally high. Blood pressure was normal. No defect in the loop of Henle could be demonstrated. No further information and no definitive report was available (Sebastian, 1989). Ruvalcaba and Martinez (1992) described 3 sibs with a combination of isolated growth hormone deficiency and Bartter syndrome. The mother had short stature with growth hormone deficiency. Other members of the kindred had average stature. All the patients were normotensive. Treatment of the 2 youngest sibs with growth hormone in addition to potassium and magnesium resulted in greater than doubled growth velocity. Smilde et al. (1994) described a family in which 7 members had hypokalemic alkalosis with hypomagnesemia and hyperreninemic hyperaldosteronism. Also, as a major symptom, they had chondrocalcinosis, a known complication of Bartter syndrome. The proband was a female who presented at age 39 with acute attacks of arthritis and was found to have chondrocalcinosis of several joints. The metabolic changes of Bartter syndrome were found 15 years later and a decreased serum magnesium was found at the age of 61. Magnesium therapy was instituted at that time and over a period of 10 years a significant reduction of the calcifications was noted. Calcium pyrophosphate crystals were demonstrated in synovial fluid of the knee by polarized microscopy. In addition, 3 brothers out of a total of 9 sibs were also affected, as were a daughter and 2 sons of the proband. Symptomatic involvement of the symphysis pubis by the chondrocalcinosis was a feature in this family. The pattern of inheritance is consistent with autosomal recessive transmission if the proband were married to a heterozygote; none of the 16 children of her 3 affected brothers was affected. In all of the patients, urinary magnesium excretion was inappropriately high and urinary calcium excretion inappropriately low. Chondrocalcinosis by itself is usually an autosomal dominant (118600); combined potassium and magnesium wasting (263800) is an autosomal recessive disorder.
Simon et al. (1997) reported 17 kindreds with Bartter syndrome type 3, confirmed by genetic analysis. A review of index cases from each kindred showed that all had spontaneous hypokalemia (serum K+ levels as low as 1.1), all had elevation of serum bicarbonate, and all had evidence of salt-wasting. Age at presentation ranged from birth to 16 years. Six studied patients had elevation of serum renin and aldosterone. The fractional reabsorption of chloride in the TAL is normally 80 to 95%; in the index patients from 2 families, the fractional chloride reabsorption was profoundly depressed at 24% and 25%, respectively, indicating a striking defect in chloride reabsorption in the TAL. Hypercalciuria was present in 11 of 17 index cases, while 6 had calcium values in the normal range. The clinical picture in the cases described by Simon et al. (1997) varied in severity from near-fatal volume depletion with hypokalemic alkalosis and respiratory arrest or requirement for massive intravenous potassium replacement to very mild disease presenting with only polyuria and weakness at age 16. Even among patients with homozygous deletions, age at presentation and clinical severity were highly variable. A feature that distinguished the disorder clearly from other forms of Bartter syndrome was the absence of renal calcification (nephrocalcinosis) in all examined patients.
Fukuyama et al. (2004) reported 2 Japanese patients who suffered from clinically diagnosed classic Bartter syndrome but who had hypocalciuria. Hypocalciuria is believed to be a pathognomic finding of Na-Cl cotransporter malfunction. Two mutations in the CLCNKB gene were found (602023.0009, 602023.0010). The authors concluded that some CLCNKB mutations may affect calcium handling in renal tubular cells.
Sun et al. (2005) reported a patient with classic Bartter syndrome who had bilateral sclerochoroidal calcification. Optical coherence tomography showed normal retina and retinal pigment epithelium overlying the choroidal lesions. The patient had persistent hypomagnesemia and normocalcemia for 26 years despite magnesium supplementary treatment. The authors suggested that hypomagnesemia may have a pathogenic role in the development of sclerochoroidal calcification in this disorder.
**Bartter syndrome, type 4b, digenic, 613090 (3), Digenic recessive**
Bartter syndrome refers to a group of disorders that are unified by autosomal recessive transmission of impaired salt reabsorption in the thick ascending loop of Henle with pronounced salt wasting, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis, and hypercalciuria. Clinical disease results from defective renal reabsorption of sodium chloride in the thick ascending limb (TAL) of the Henle loop, where 30% of filtered salt is normally reabsorbed (Simon et al., 1997).
Patients with antenatal (or neonatal) forms of Bartter syndrome (e.g., BARTS1, 601678) typically present with premature birth associated with polyhydramnios and low birth weight and may develop life-threatening dehydration in the neonatal period. Patients with classic Bartter syndrome present later in life and may be sporadically asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic (summary by Simon et al., 1996 and Fremont and Chan, 2012).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Bartter syndrome, see 607364.



FRAS1
**Fraser syndrome 1, 219000 (3), AR**
Fraser syndrome is an autosomal recessive malformation disorder characterized by cryptophthalmos, syndactyly, and abnormalities of the respiratory and urogenital tract (summary by van Haelst et al., 2008).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Fraser Syndrome
Fraser syndrome-2 (FRASRS2) is caused by mutation in the FREM2 gene (608945) on chromosome 13q13, and Fraser syndrome-3 (FRASRS3; 617667) is caused by mutation in the GRIP1 gene (604597) on chromosome 12q14.
See Bowen syndrome (211200) for a comparable but probably distinct syndrome of multiple congenital malformations.
In each of 2 sibships, Fraser (1962) observed 2 sisters affected at birth by various combinations: cryptophthalmos; absent or malformed lacrimal ducts; middle and outer ear malformations; high palate; cleavage along the midplane of nares and tongue; hypertelorism; laryngeal stenosis; syndactyly; wide separation of symphysis pubis; displacement of umbilicus and nipples; primitive mesentery of small bowel; maldeveloped kidneys; fusion of labia and enlargement of clitoris; and bicornuate uterus and malformed fallopian tubes. In each sibship, 1 sister was stillborn and the other viable. Sex chromatin was positive in both surviving infants. Neither set of parents was consanguineous.
Gupta and Saxena (1962) reported cryptophthalmos in 2 offspring of consanguineous parents. In 1 case it was unilateral and death occurred at 1 month. In the other the cryptophthalmos was bilateral and was accompanied by congenital deafness, undescended testes, small penis with hypospadias, and other deformities. The older literature on cryptophthalmos with associated malformations was reviewed by Duke-Elder (1963).
Francois (1969) described affected brother and sister and gave a comprehensive review, pointing out the rather frequent examples of parental consanguinity (about 15% of cases) and of familial cases. Syndactyly is a feature of many of the cases. Francannet et al. (1990) reported instances of parental consanguinity: in 1 family, 3 children were born of a first-cousin marriage, and in a second, an affected fetus resulted from a double first-cousin marriage. An isolated case was reported by Ide and Wollschlaeger (1969). The parents were not related. The patient had syndactyly, hair extending forward over the temples, deformity of the nares and external auditory meatus, etc. Azevedo et al. (1973) reported 4 cases in 2 sibships, each with consanguineous parents. Syndactyly and other malformations were present in some.
Lurie and Cherstvoy (1984) reported 4 families with the cryptophthalmos-syndactyly syndrome. Perinatal death occurred in 9 affected members. Autopsy, performed in 6 cases, showed renal agenesis (bilateral in 3, unilateral in 3). One family had at least 4 affected sibs and 2 others had 2 affected children each. No consanguinity was established.
Burn and Marwood (1982) reported 3 sibs with Fraser syndrome presenting as bilateral renal agenesis. Only 1 of the 3 sibs had cryptophthalmos (which was unilateral). Because cryptophthalmos is not an essential part of the syndrome, Fraser syndrome is a preferable designation.
Mortimer et al. (1985) reported monozygotic twins concordant for bilateral renal agenesis and other features consistent with Fraser syndrome: syndactyly and laryngeal stenosis.
From their personal experience and a review of the literature, Koenig and Spranger (1986) identified 5 cases of the cryptophthalmos-syndactyly syndrome without cryptophthalmos. Thomas et al. (1986) also emphasized the occurrence of the cryptophthalmos syndrome without cryptophthalmos--an argument for using the eponym Fraser syndrome. In a literature review, they found 124 cases of cryptophthalmos of which 27 were isolated and 97 associated with multiple malformations. They found that isolated cryptophthalmos was sporadic in 16 cases and familial in 11. The familial cases were in 3 families with vertical transmission (123570). Some of the most characteristic malformations of the Fraser syndrome occur in areas that remain temporarily fused in utero: the eyelids, the digits, and the vagina. Since separation of the eyelids and digits involves a process of controlled necrosis, Thomas et al. (1986) speculated about a defect in programmed cell death. They also drew attention to the parallel with experimental teratogenesis by means of hypovitaminosis A in the pig and rat. Malformations reminiscent of the Fraser syndrome are produced. Thomas et al. (1986) asked whether defects in the metabolism of retinoids may play a role in pathogenesis. Meinecke (1986) also contributed to the understanding of the Fraser syndrome without cryptophthalmos.
Greenberg et al. (1986) described associated gonadal dysgenesis in an infant girl with Fraser syndrome: gonadoblastoma developed in a dysgenetic ovary.
Gattuso et al. (1987) gave a quantitative estimate of the frequency of the several clinical manifestations of Fraser syndrome on the basis of 3 new cases and 68 published cases. Craniofacial abnormalities were reported in all, cryptophthalmos in 93%, and syndactyly in 54%.
Bialer and Wilson (1988) reported a child who according to the strict criteria proposed by Thomas et al. (1986) might not be considered to have syndromal cryptophthalmos; however, the child had several malformations considered minor in that classification and was born of parents who were related in a complex way, giving the proband a coefficient of consanguinity of 0.086.
Boyd et al. (1988) presented postmortem findings in 11 cases of probable Fraser syndrome; 8 were neonatal deaths, 1 was a stillbirth, and 2 were midtrimester fetuses. Ramsing et al. (1990) presented the clinical and autopsy findings in 2 fetuses and 1 newborn infant with Fraser syndrome.
Stevens et al. (1994) observed pulmonary hyperplasia and laryngeal stenosis in 2 sibs with Fraser cryptophthalmos syndrome. Markedly enlarged echogenic lungs were demonstrable at 16 and 17 weeks of gestation. A third unrelated patient with Fraser syndrome had laryngeal stenosis, renal agenesis, and normal lung development. Reports of 3 additional cases of pulmonary hyperplasia in the Fraser syndrome were found. In all of these cases the likely mechanism for pulmonary hyperplasia was retention of fetal lung fluid by laryngeal or tracheal obstruction.
Pankau et al. (1994) described a newborn female with total syndactyly of the 3rd and 4th fingers, partial syndactyly of all other fingers, postaxial polydactyly of feet, bilateral renal agenesis, and bilateral anophthalmia. The child was born of consanguineous Turkish parents. Although the infant had normal eyelids with palpebrae and eyelashes and had histologically confirmed anophthalmia and postaxial polydactyly, Pankau et al. (1994) considered this case to be an unusual manifestation of Fraser syndrome.
Amr (1996) described unilateral cryptophthalmos with bilateral renal agenesis and syndactyly of hands and feet in a stillborn female fetus.
Andiran et al. (1999) reported a case of Fraser syndrome with anterior urethral atresia. They suggested that newborns with Fraser syndrome, especially those with umbilical discharge or severe hydroureteronephrosis, be evaluated for patency of the anterior urethra.
Slavotinek and Tifft (2002) reviewed 117 cases diagnosed as Fraser syndrome or cryptophthalmos published after the comprehensive review of Thomas et al. (1986). Their findings emphasized the clinical variability associated with Fraser syndrome and supported heterogeneity of the disorder. They also noted patterns of anomalies (for example, bicornuate uterus with imperforate anus or anal stenosis and renal malformations) that are found in other syndromes and associations without cryptophthalmos, suggesting that common modifier genes may explain some of the phenotypic variation in Fraser syndrome.
Van Haelst et al. (2007) studied the clinical features of 59 newly diagnosed individuals with Fraser syndrome from 40 families, including 25 consanguineous families. Compared to previous reviews, they found a higher frequency of abnormalities of the skull, larynx, umbilicus, urinary tract, and anus, and a lower frequency of mental retardation and cleft lip with or without cleft palate. Clinical features in probands and sibs were remarkably similar. Prenatally diagnosed patients had more manifestations giving rise to a pathologic amount of amniotic fluid, but otherwise had similar frequency of symptoms to those diagnosed postnatally.



SBF2
**Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, type 4B2, 604563 (3), AR**
Autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4B is a demyelinating hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy characterized by abnormal folding of myelin sheaths. CMT4B1 (601382) is a clinically similar disorder caused by mutation in the MTMR2 gene (603557) on 11q22.
For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of autosomal recessive demyelinating CMT, see CMT4A (214400).
Gambardella et al. (1998) reported 2 sibs in a family from a small village in southern Italy who had early-onset CMT with focally folded myelin sheaths. The patients developed symptoms at 2 and 10 years of age, respectively. Both had progressive distal lower limb weakness and atrophy, followed by involvement of the upper limbs. There was distal sensory loss, areflexia, and bilateral pes equinovarus. Both patients also had unilateral sensorineural hearing loss, suggesting cranial nerve involvement. Sural nerve biopsy showed segmental demyelination and redundant loops and folds of the myelin sheath. Gambardella et al. (1998) suggested autosomal recessive inheritance. Linkage analysis excluded the CMT4B1 locus on chromosome 11q23.
Senderek et al. (2003) reported a consanguineous Turkish family in which 4 patients were affected with a severe sensorimotor neuropathy characterized by focally folded myelin sheaths on nerve biopsy. Disease onset was around age 5 years and was characterized by distal muscle weakness and atrophy, foot deformities such as pes cavus and hammertoes, steppage gait, and areflexia in the lower limbs. Motor nerve conduction velocities (NCVs) were severely reduced (e.g., 16.5 m/s, 18.5 m/s). Sural nerve biopsies showed severe loss of myelinated fibers with focally folded myelin protrusions.
CMT4B2 With Early-Onset Glaucoma
Kiwaki et al. (2000) reported a consanguineous family from southern Japan in which 3 members had hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy with myelin folding accompanied by juvenile-onset open-angle glaucoma. All 3 patients had early childhood onset of neuropathy, markedly slowed NCVs of less than 20 m/s, aberrantly excessive myelin folding complexes with segmental de- and remyelination on nerve biopsy, increased CSF protein, and juvenile-onset glaucoma.
Azzedine et al. (2003) reported 2 consanguineous families from Tunisia and Morocco with a demyelinating sensorimotor neuropathy and early-onset glaucoma. Mean age at onset was 8 years. Motor nerve conduction velocities were severely reduced, and nerve biopsies showed myelin outfoldings. In the index patient of each family, visual impairment was precocious and severe, leading to a loss of vision. Ophthalmologic examination showed congenital glaucoma with a buphthalmos, a megalocornea, and increased intraocular pressure. Other affected members of both families had increased intraocular pressure.



OCLN
**Pseudo-TORCH syndrome 1, 251290 (3), AR**
Pseudo-TORCH syndrome-1 is an autosomal recessive neurologic disorder with characteristic clinical and neuroradiologic features that mimic intrauterine TORCH infection in the absence of evidence of infection. Affected individuals have congenital microcephaly, intracranial calcifications, simplified gyration and polymicrogyria, and severe developmental delay (Reardon et al., 1994; O'Driscoll et al., 2010).
Crow et al. (2000, 2003) called attention to the phenotypic overlap of pseudo-TORCH syndrome and Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome (AGS; 225750), and even suggested that some cases may represent the same disorder. Congenital microcephaly, thrombocytopenia, hepatic dysfunction, and hepatosplenomegaly are usually associated with pseudo-TORCH syndrome and not with AGS, but some patients with AGS have shown these features.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Pseudo-TORCH Syndrome
See also PTORCH2 (617397), caused by mutation in the USP18 gene (607057) on chromosome 22q11, and PTORCH3 (618886), caused by mutation in the STAT2 gene (600556) on chromosome 12q13.
Ishitsu et al. (1985) described 2 brothers, aged 49 and 17 months, with microcephaly, severe mental retardation, quadriplegia, and calcification of the cerebral white matter. Congenital toxoplasmosis was excluded by the negative serology in the mother and sons, by the absence of chorioretinopathy, and by the different character of the cerebral calcification. They suggested that this was a previously undescribed genetic disorder, either autosomal or X-linked recessive. The parents were not related.
Baraitser et al. (1983) reported 2 infant sibs born with congenital microcephaly who developed seizures, hypertonia, and spasticity. There was severe developmental delay, and imaging studies showed intracranial calcifications in the white matter and thalamus. There was no evidence of intrauterine infection. Postmortem examination was not performed.
Burn et al. (1986) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Turkish/Cypriot parents, with a disorder resembling intrauterine infection. Both patients were born with microcephaly, jaundice, hepatomegaly, and corneal clouding. Both were jittery in the first hours of life and were found to have thrombocytopenia and petechiae. Brain imaging showed intracranial periventricular calcification. There was no evidence of intrauterine infection. Both infants died at ages 30 and 50 days, respectively. Postmortem examination showed enlarged ventricles, lissencephaly, polymicrogyria, and severely disorganized cortex. There was massive calcification throughout the brain. The basal ganglia, thalamus, hippocampus, and amygdala were shrunken and calcified with severe neuronal loss and gliosis. Calcification was also present in the cerebellum and brainstem. Burn et al. (1986) commented that the disorder in these sibs was distinct from Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome.
Reardon et al. (1994) presented data on 10 patients from 5 families with a combination of microcephaly, intracranial calcification, and a clinical course resembling congenital TORCH infection. The parents were first cousins in 1 family. Hepatomegaly, abnormal liver function tests, petechial rash, and thrombocytopenia were present in some of the affected persons. The optic fundi were normal in all cases in which they were examined. Reardon et al. (1994) compared these cases with those reported by Baraitser et al. (1983), Ishitsu et al. (1985), and Burn et al. (1986). Based on their observations, Reardon et al. (1994) suggested that this entity can be characterized by microcephaly from birth, seizures, periventricular calcification, and sometimes hepatosplenomegaly, platelet dysfunction, and purpura which clinically mimics TORCH infection. The entity was considered to be distinct from the Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome.
Monastiri et al. (1997) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with congenital microcephaly, profound growth retardation, and periventricular calcifications. Variable features included thrombocytopenia, anemia, corneal clouding, spasticity, seizures, and hepatosplenomegaly. Both died in infancy. One sib had dysmorphic features, including microphthalmia, hypertelorism, micrognathia, and micropenis, and left ventricular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The other sib had no dysmorphic features.
Slee et al. (1999) presented 2 sisters with congenital microcephaly, developmental delay, marked microphthalmia, congenital cataracts, cerebral and cerebellar hypoplasia, and extensive intracranial periventricular calcification. No evidence of intrauterine infection was found. Slee et al. (1999) suggested that the sibs they reported represented a more severe form of pseudo-TORCH syndrome or a previously undescribed entity. Microcephaly with chorioretinopathy (251270) has changes reminiscent of those seen with fetal intrauterine infection, particularly toxoplasmosis; hence, the designation pseudotoxoplasmosis syndrome.
Briggs et al. (2008) reported 5 patients, including 2 sib pairs, with a distinct pattern of band-like intracranial calcifications, profound developmental delay, postnatal microcephaly, and simplified gyration or polymicrogyria. Two sibs were born of consanguineous Turkish parents. The disorder resembled pseudo-TORCH syndrome, except that none of the patients had thrombocytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, or congenital microcephaly. Other features included seizures and spastic quadriparesis with hypotonia. Calcification was present in the basal ganglia, thalami, and pons, and formed a ribbon in the posterior frontal, perisylvian, anterior temporal and anterior parietal areas. Some patients had a slightly hypoplastic cerebellum. Mutation in known AGS genes was excluded in 1 patient. In addition, the 2 Turkish sibs had possible evidence of early postnatal cytomegalovirus infection. Although the same group (Crow et al. (2000, 2003)) had previously suggested that some cases of pseudo-TORCH syndrome may represent Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome, Briggs et al. (2008) noted that the umbrella term 'pseudo-TORCH syndrome' remains a useful designation in cases in which the disorder is clearly not Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome, as in their report.
Abdel-Salam et al. (2008) reported a consanguineous family from Egypt in which 5 sibs had congenital microcephaly, growth retardation, and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. There were multiple structural brain anomalies, including cortical band-like calcification, calcifications of the basal ganglia and brainstem, polymicrogyria, loss of white matter, dysplastic ventricles, and hypogenesis of the corpus callosum and cerebellum. Some of the patients had dysmorphic facial features, such as anteverted nostrils, high-arched palate, low-set ears, and sloping forehead. Other features included nystagmus and spasticity. Three died within the first years of life, whereas 2 died within days after birth with high fever and status epilepticus. No abnormalities of the eyes were noted. The features overlapped those of pseudo-TORCH syndrome.
Abdel-Salam and Zaki (2009) presented a family in which 2 sibs had congenital microcephaly, refractory seizures, apneic spells, sterile pyrexia, intracranial calcifications, polymicrogyria, dysplastic ventricles, hypogenesis of the corpus callosum, and loss of white matter. Facial features included sloping forehead, bitemporal grooving, nystagmus, prominent anteverted nostrils, long philtrum, high-arched palate, and microretrognathia. There was truncal hypotonia, absent head control, and increased tone of arms and legs with hyperreflexia. The patients died at 15 and 16 months of age, respectively. The authors concluded that the phenotype was consistent with an autosomal recessive form of a congenital infection-like syndrome.
O'Driscoll et al. (2010) described 10 affected individuals from 6 families with BLCPMG. Three of the families had been previously reported by Briggs et al. (2008) and Abdel-Salam and Zaki (2009). All affected individuals were severely microcephalic, developed seizures within 4 months of birth, showed demonstrated minimal developmental progress, and had spastic tetraparesis. Four of 5 patients had increased cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein levels. Brain imaging showed bilateral symmetrical PMG in a perisylvian and temporal distribution, with severe loss of cerebral volume, simplified gyration, and wide sylvian fissures. Calcification was present bilaterally in the deep cortical gray matter with variable calcification in the pons, thalami, and globus pallidus. Postmortem analysis of 1 patient showed mineral deposits in the deep cerebral and cerebellar cortices, frequently surrounding small blood vessels. Calcification was noted in cells in close apposition to endothelia, which possibly represented pericytes or astrocytes. Blood vessels without associated calcification were also seen.
Clinical Variability
LeBlanc et al. (2013) reported 2 patients from a consanguineous Maritime Canadian family who had a complex phenotype comprising congenital microcephaly, intracranial primarily subcortical calcifications in the thalami, basal ganglia, and subcortical white matter, severely delayed psychomotor development, cortical visual impairment, early-onset seizures, and chronic renal dysfunction with small echogenic kidneys, consistent with cortical calcifications. One of the patients had no evidence of a neuronal migration defect, but the other had evidence of mild polymicrogyria. The patients had no independent motility, use of the hands, or speech. An extensive genetic workup, including homozygosity mapping, candidate gene sequencing, exome sequencing, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification, PCR analysis, and Sanger sequencing identified a homozygous genomic rearrangement involving the OCLN gene. The rearrangement was a deletion within exon 9, which is expressed in all 7 of the known OCLN isoforms. Genetic analysis was complicated by the presence of a pseudogene in this region; the patients were homozygous for the pseudogene, whereas normal controls were heterozygous for the OCLN gene and the pseudogene. Although some of the patients reported by O'Driscoll et al. (2010) had less severe renal impairment, LeBlanc et al. (2013) noted that extracranial phenotypes, particularly the severe renal impairment seen in their patients, have not consistently been reported in this disorder. Previously reported OCLN mutations have occurred in exons 3 to 6 or at the 5-6 intron splice site, and are thus not expressed in all isoforms. LeBlanc et al. (2013) suggested that the loss of peripheral OCLN in their patients with interruption of exon 9 may explain the unusual renal involvement.



RPIA
**?Ribose 5-phosphate isomerase deficiency, 608611 (3), AR**
Van der Knaap et al. (1999) reported a 14-year-old boy, born of unrelated parents, with leukoencephalopathy associated with a disturbance in the metabolism of polyols. The boy had psychomotor retardation from early in life and developed epilepsy at age 4 years. From age 7 years, a slow neurologic regression occurred with prominent cerebellar ataxia, some spasticity, optic atrophy, and a mild sensorimotor neuropathy. Neither organomegaly nor dysfunction of the internal organs was present. Motor and sensory nerve conduction velocities were mildly decreased in his arms and legs, confirming a polyneuropathy. Extensive abnormalities of the cerebral white matter were demonstrated by MRI of the brain at age 14 years. Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy of the brain showed highly elevated abnormal peaks that were identified as representing pentitols ribitol and arabitol. Huck et al. (2004) demonstrated deficient activity of ribose 5-phosphate isomerase, one of the pentose phosphate pathway enzymes, in fibroblasts from the patient reported by van der Knaap et al. (1999). They noted that deficiency of transaldolase (602063), another enzyme in the pentose phosphate pathway, had previously been demonstrated in a patient with liver cirrhosis and abnormal polyol levels in body fluids. RPI deficiency represented the second instance of an inborn error in the reversible phase of the pentose phosphate pathway, confirming that defects in pentose and polyol metabolism constitute a group of inborn metabolic disorders.
Mahler et al. (2019) reported a child with severe global developmental delay, tapetoretinal degeneration, and coordination difficulties who was found to have a mutation in the RPIA gene.



BMPR1B
**Acromesomelic dysplasia, Demirhan type, 609441 (3), AR**
Demirhan et al. (2005) reported a 16-year-old girl from a multiconsanguineous family who had a severe limb malformation consisting of severe brachydactyly with radial deviation of the fingers, ulnar deviation of the hands, fusion of the carpal/tarsal bones, aplasia of the fibula, and bilateral clubfoot deformity with small broad feet and short toes that appeared constricted at their bases. In addition, she had genital anomalies and primary amenorrhea; ultrasound examination revealed absence of the ovaries and hypoplasia of the uterus, and endocrinologic studies confirmed hypergonadotropic hypogonadism.
Graul-Neumann et al. (2014) described 2 consanguineous families in which 3 individuals (1 female and 2 males) had a severe form of limb malformation consisting of bilateral aplasia of the fibula, severe brachydactyly, and carpal/tarsal fusion. One affected individual also had bowing of tibiae and radii. The mother in the first family had mild type A2 brachydactyly (BDA2; 112600) with shortened middle phalanges of the second and fifth fingers and toes. Both parents in the second family were short of stature; the father also had mild generalized brachydactyly. Graul-Neumann et al. (2014) diagnosed the patients with Grebe-type acromesomelic dysplasia (AMDG; 200700).
Stange et al. (2015) described an individual with disproportionate short stature, mild acromesomelic dysplasia, limb shortening, absent fibulae, short fingers, abnormal finger joints with deviations, and hypoplastic toes with broad and short toenails. Abdominal ultrasound was normal, with the presence of a uterus and ovaries of normal size and shape. There was no hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, and the patient had normal levels of luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, estradiol, and progesterone. Stange et al. (2015) diagnosed the patient with du Pan acromesomelic dysplasia (228900).
**Brachydactyly, type A1, D, 616849 (3), AD**
Racacho et al. (2015) reported 2 unrelated patients with 'BDA1-like' brachydactyly. The first proband, a 16-month-old Caucasian girl born to healthy unrelated parents, was of normal stature but had very short index fingers and ulnar curvature of the fifth digits, with reduced digital creases at the distal interphalangeal joints. She also had shortened big toes and very long second toes, with moderate syndactyly between toes 2 and 3. Hand x-rays showed absence of the middle phalanges of the index fingers, with very small middle phalanges of the fifth digits, as well as slightly reduced size of the terminal phalanges of the thumbs. The metacarpophalangeal pattern profile (MCPP) revealed short proximal and distal phalanges of both thumbs, severe shortening of the middle phalanx of digit 2, shortening of the middle and distal phalanges of digit 3, and slight shortening of the middle phalanx of digit 5. The bones of digit 4 appeared to be normal. The second proband, a 9-year-old boy of African descent who was born to healthy unrelated parents, presented at 11 months of age with brachydactyly and clinodactyly of both fifth digits and the right thumb. Hand x-rays showed a small cube-shaped middle phalanx of digit 2, with a socket-like groove for the epiphysis of the proximal phalanx, as well as a small trapezoid-shaped middle phalanx of digit 5 in both hands. MCPP from both hands revealed a shortened proximal phalanx of digit 1, moderate shortening of the distal phalanges of digits 1 and 2, and severe shortening of the middle phalanges of digits 2 and 5. The feet of this patient were not described. Noting the disproportionate lengthening of digits 3 and 4 in the hands, Racacho et al. (2015) designated his condition as mixed BDA1-arachnodactyly.
**Brachydactyly, type A2, 112600 (3), AD**
Brachydactyly type A2 is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by malformations of the middle phalanx of the index finger and by anomalies of the second toe (summary by Su et al., 2011).
In brachydactyly type A2, shortening of the middle phalanges is confined to the index finger and the second toe, all other digits being more or less normal. Because of a rhomboid or triangular shape of the affected middle phalanx, the end of the second finger usually deviates radially. Temtamy and McKusick (1978) noted that this rare form of brachydactyly had been described in 3 different kindreds of German, Norwegian, and Swiss descent (Ziegner, 1903; Mohr and Wriedt, 1919; Hanhart, 1940). The family of Mohr and Wriedt (1919) contained a possible homozygote. Temtamy and McKusick (1978) provided details of a fourth affected family, of African American descent, originally reported by Edelson (1972).
Seemann et al. (2005) described a large Norwegian pedigree with short index fingers and variable clinodactyly. X-rays showed hypoplasia or aplasia of the second phalanx of the second digit and, to a variable extent, shortening and shape abnormalities of the middle phalanx of the fifth digit.
Kjaer et al. (2006) studied 37 living members of the then 9-generation Norwegian family of Danish descent with BDA2 originally described by Mohr and Wriedt (1919), including 2 individuals who had been examined by Mohr and Wriedt when they were children. Nineteen family members had a shortened or absent middle phalanx of the index finger, and other fingers were occasionally involved. The fourth finger was characteristically spared, leading the authors to suggest that the phenotype in this family represented a subtype of brachydactyly type A2.
Ploger et al. (2008) studied 14 affected and 14 unaffected members of a 6-generation family with BDA2. All 5 affected individuals who were radiologically evaluated had a metacarpophalangeal profile that demonstrated a second mesophalanx that was shorter than mesophalanges 3, 4, and 5, consistent with a diagnosis of BDA2. Other occasional findings included a relatively short first metacarpal or first proximal phalanx. Hands were more commonly affected than feet. The phenotype was variable, with some affected individuals showing an almost normal pattern, whereas others had additional features such as mild hypoplasia of middle phalanges of fingers 3 and 4, indicating overlap with BDA1 (112500) and BDC (113100).



DCDC2
**?Deafness, autosomal recessive 66, 610212 (3), AR**
Tlili et al. (2005) described a 6-generation consanguineous Tunisian family of 54 individuals of which 10 were affected by a profound congenital nonsyndromic deafness. Audiometric tests showed loss of hearing greater than 70 dB for all frequencies tested in all affected individuals. All deaf individuals were otherwise healthy, with normal life spans and without dysmorphic or other abnormal findings, including vestibular defects, skeletal or craniofacial malformations, subcutaneous calcifications, or neural tube defects.
**Nephronophthisis 19, 616217 (3), AR**
Schueler et al. (2015) reported a boy, born of consanguineous parents, who developed hepatic fibrosis at age 11 months and end-stage renal disease due to nephronophthisis at age 14 years. Renal evaluation showed increased echogenicity, severe interstitial fibrosis, and tubular dilation with prominent epithelial luminal budding. The patient had hepatosplenomegaly with extensive fibrosis, destruction of the bile ducts, focal bile ductal proliferation, and cholestasis. He died at 16 years of age from esophageal bleeding. An unrelated patient had hepatosplenomegaly, ductal plate malformation, hepatic fibrosis, and mild cholestasis; he underwent liver transplantation at age 2 years, and had no renal involvement at age 9 years.
**Sclerosing cholangitis, neonatal, 617394 (3), AR**
Neonatal sclerosing cholangitis is a rare autosomal recessive form of severe liver disease with onset in infancy. Affected infants have jaundice, cholestasis, acholic stools, and progressive liver dysfunction resulting in fibrosis and cirrhosis; most require liver transplantation in the first few decades of life. Cholangiography shows patent biliary ducts, but there are bile duct irregularities (summary by Girard et al., 2016; Grammatikopoulos et al., 2016).
Girard et al. (2016) reported 4 patients from 2 unrelated consanguineous families with neonatal sclerosing cholangitis. The patients presented with neonatal icterus, cholestasis, acholic stools, and portal hypertension. All were diagnosed with cirrhosis between 2 and 9 months of age. In family 1, the sibs needed liver transplantation at ages 25 and 14 years, respectively, whereas in family 2, 1 sib needed liver transplantation at age 6 years, and the other was on the waiting list at age 3.5 years. Cholangiograms showed patent bile ducts with thin and irregular intrahepatic biliary tree; the patients in family 2 also had extrahepatic bile duct irregularities. Liver biopsy showed cirrhosis and fibrosis. The patients had variable renal involvement: 1 patient had left vesicoureteral reflux with ureteral duplication and a small left kidney, and showed altered renal function after liver transplant associated with septic shock, whereas his sib had normal renal morphology and size, but also developed altered renal function after transplant. In the other family, 1 sib had a hyperechogenic kidney with normal renal function. One of the 4 patients had mild developmental delay; otherwise, none of the patients had additional features, including skin involvement or hearing loss.
Grammatikopoulos et al. (2016) reported 7 patients from 6 unrelated families, 4 of whom were of Greek descent, with neonatal sclerosing cholangitis. The patients presented in the first weeks or years of life (median age of 6 weeks) with jaundice, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, pale stools, and/or abnormal liver function tests with increased serum GGT (see 612346). Cholangiography confirmed intrahepatic cholangiopathy in all patients. Liver biopsies showed ductular proliferation, portal tract inflammation, and bridging fibrosis, and most patients developed biliary cirrhosis. Other histologic findings included ductal bile plugs, variable ectasia of perihilar bile ducts, absence of bile ducts in areas of fibrosis, and chronic cholestasis. Five patients underwent liver transplantation between 10 and 15 years of age, 1 patient was lost to follow-up at age 6 years, and another died at age 16 years without liver transplantation. Two patients had renal involvement: the patient who died at age 16 without a liver transplant developed end-stage renal disease requiring dialysis before she died, and another patient developed hepatorenal syndrome that resolved after liver transplantation. None of the patients had neurologic involvement or hearing loss.



SMOC2
**Dentin dysplasia, type I, with microdontia and misshapen teeth, 125400 (3), AR**
In dentin dysplasia type I, both primary and secondary dentitions are affected. The color and general morphology of the teeth are usually normal, although they may be slightly opalescent and blue or brown. Teeth may be very mobile and exfoliate spontaneously because of inadequate root formation. On radiographs, the roots are short and may be more pointed than normal. Pulp chambers are usually absent except for a chevron-shaped remnant in the crown (Witkop, 1975). Root canals are usually absent. Periapical radiolucencies may be present at the apices of affected teeth, for reasons unknown. On light microscopic examination of the permanent teeth, the coronal dentin is normal, but further apically becomes irregular, fills the pulp chamber, and has a 'sand-dune' morphology. Scanning electron microscopic studies of the deciduous and permanent teeth have been reported (Sauk et al., 1972; Melnick et al., 1980).
Subclassification of Dentin Dysplasia Type I
O Carroll et al. (1991) and O Carroll and Duncan (1994) reviewed dentin dysplasia and proposed 4 subtypes of dentin dysplasia type I, which they designated as DD1a-d. In DD1a, there is complete obliteration of pulp chambers and no root development, with many periapical radiolucent areas. In DD1b, there are horizontal crescent-shaped radiolucent pulpal remnants and a few millimeters of root development, with many periapical radiolucent areas. DD1c shows 2 horizontal crescent-shaped radiolucent lines and significant but incomplete root development, with or without periapical radiolucent areas. DD1d is characterized by visible pulp chambers and oval pulp stones in the coronal third of the root canal with bulging of the root around the stones and few if any periapical radiolucent areas. The authors noted that the distinctions between the subtypes of DD1 were primarily useful clinically in terms of treatment options.
Brown (1944) described a 19-year-old boy with underdeveloped dental roots and early exfoliation of the teeth. The father and a paternal uncle were edentulous. Lind (1972) described hypoplasia of the teeth roots in 3 generations.
Morris and Augsburger (1977) reported a kindred in which dentin dysplasia type I was associated with generalized osteosclerosis and mild shortening of the distal ulna; see 125440.
O Carroll and Duncan (1994) studied a large 6-generation family in which 35 individuals were confirmed or reliably reported to have dentin dysplasia type I, and a further 6 were suspected of having it on the basis of the autosomal dominant nature of its transmission. Two affected family members had been reported by Duncan et al. (1991). The coronal size, shape, and color of most of the teeth were normal, but root size and shape were markedly altered. Panoramic radiographs revealed either complete pulpal obliteration or semilunar pulpal remnants, with no root structure present or roots that were either a few millimeters long or were 10 to 15 mm long. Some patients had only short roots and others exhibited a combination of both types. Periapical radiolucent lesions were found on almost all teeth in most affected individuals. Of 18 patients in whom panoramic radiographs were made, 8 were classified as having DD1a, the most severe form of dentin dysplasia, and the remaining 10 were classified as having DD1b.
Kalk et al. (1998) reported 5 affected individuals over 2 generations of a family with dentin dysplasia type I. The proband was an 8-year-old boy who was referred due to delayed eruption of upper central incisors. Examination revealed dentition with normal morphology and color, except for opacity of the incisional margin of the erupted incisors. All deciduous and permanent teeth were highly mobile. The dentition was free of caries, although oral hygiene was poor. Panoramic radiographs showed short, blunted, and malformed roots in both the deciduous and permanent teeth. The root canals were obliterated and appeared as small slits at the apices of the lower incisors; they were not visible in other teeth at all. The pulp chambers were obliterated as well, appearing as 2 crescent-shaped radiolucent lines, concave towards each other, in both deciduous and permanent molars. Periapical radiolucencies were present at the permanent lower incisors and first molars. The proband's father also had a history of delayed eruption, and stated that he had lost most of his teeth at an early age due to spontaneous exfoliation, requiring a full maxillary denture and partial mandibular denture by the end of adolescence. Panoramic radiographs showed obliterated root canals and pulp chambers, short roots, and periapical lucencies, confirming the diagnosis of DTDP1. The father had 2 sisters with the same history of delayed eruption and premature exfoliation, and 1 of the sisters had an affected 11-year-old daughter. Kalk et al. (1998) stated that the short root lengths in this family did not correlate with the radiographic pulp obliteration, and thus subclassification of patients into the previously proposed 4 distinct forms was not possible. In addition, root lengths varied from diminutive to intermediate, and cases could not be described as 'total' or 'subtotal.'
Dentin Dysplasia, Type I, With Extreme Microdontia and Misshapen Teeth
Bloch-Zupan et al. (2011) described a 10-year-old boy and his 5-year-old female first cousin, both born of consanguineous Turkish parents, who had extreme microdontia, oligodontia, dental shape anomalies, double permanent-tooth formation, thin enamel, and short roots with thin associated alveolar bone. Oligodontia was diagnosed due to missing permanent teeth, 14 in the boy and 13 in the girl. Anomalies of tooth size were observed, and extreme microdontia affected both the primary teeth, which were all present, and the permanent teeth; however, some of the permanent teeth were macrodontic. All existing teeth showed anomalies of shape, with extra cusps and tiny, globular, malformed crowns, especially in the primary dentition. Double tooth formation (notched and macrodontic) was visible on the permanent incisors. Temporary and permanent molars exhibited taurodontism; in addition, the molars had tooth-structure anomalies reminiscent of dentin dysplasia type I spectrum, with very short roots. Dental x-rays showed that the enamel was very thin and had limited contrast compared to the dentin. The alveolar bone associated with the primary teeth was underdeveloped, and the primary teeth were mobile and exfoliated prematurely. Psychomotor development was normal in both children; the girl was obese and had 'very mild bone abnormalities' that were not present in her male cousin. Bloch-Zupan et al. (2011) stated that the dental phenotype in the affected cousins resembled that of dentin dysplasia type I, but was distinct because of the extreme microdontia and dental shape anomalies.
AlFawaz et al. (2013) reported 3 sibs, aged 16, 10, and 8 years, from a consanguineous Pakistani family with oligodontia and microdontia. Some teeth also showed abnormal forms with buccal evagination, and there was an incisal notch in the central incisors of varying degrees. Radiographic examination revealed 10 to 15 missing adult teeth in each of the sibs, and there was evidence of taurodontism in some of their posterior permanent molars; the permanent molars also displayed a single root with a thistle-shaped pulp. Two of the sibs had an anterior open bite due to lack of upper anterior alveolar growth, and all 3 had increased amounts of calculus deposits in the lower central incisor region.



TRIM2
**Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, type 2R, 615490 (3), AR**
Ylikallio et al. (2013) reported an 18-year-old Finnish girl with early-onset axonal peripheral neuropathy. She had mildly delayed motor development with independent walking at age 1 year. Examination at age 4 years showed generalized hypotonia, thin build with small muscle mass, atrophy of the small muscles in the hands and feet, and areflexia. She walked with a broad-based gait and could not walk on her heels. Electrophysiologic studies showed polyneuropathy of the upper and lower limbs, with decreased motor nerve conduction velocities and decreased sensory and motor amplitudes. She also had pes cavus. Sural nerve biopsy showed a decrease in myelinated fibers and nonspecific axonal degeneration; electron microscopic studies showed neurofilament accumulation within axons. She had no cranial nerve involvement and remained active with normal cognition at age 18 years.
Pehlivan et al. (2015) reported a Turkish boy, born of consanguineous parents, with onset of CMT2R in early infancy. He was noted to have tracheomalacia at age 15 days. At age 6 months, he developed respiratory insufficiency associated with vocal cord paralysis necessitating tracheostomy. At age 16 months, he had axial hypotonia, muscle weakness, increased tone in the lower limbs, knee contracture, hammertoes, pes equinus and pes cavus, and absent deep tendon reflexes. EMG showed markedly reduced amplitudes with decreased motor nerve conductive velocities consistent with severe axonal polyneuropathy. He died of respiratory distress at age 2 years, 9 months.



DCC
**Colorectal cancer, somatic, 114500 (3)**
Colorectal cancer is a heterogeneous disease that is common in both men and women. In addition to lifestyle and environmental risk factors, gene defects can contribute to an inherited predisposition to CRC. CRC is caused by changes in different molecular pathogenic pathways, such as chromosomal instability, CpG island methylator phenotype, and microsatellite instability. Chromosome instability is the most common alteration and is present in almost 85% of all cases (review by Schweiger et al., 2013).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Colorectal Cancer
Mutations in a single gene result in a marked predisposition to colorectal cancer in 2 distinct syndromes: familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP; 175100) and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC; see 120435). FAP is caused by mutations in the APC gene (611731), whereas HNPCC is caused by mutations in several genes, including MSH2 (609309), MLH1 (120436), PMS1 (600258), PMS2 (600259), MSH6 (600678), TGFBR2 (190182), and MLH3 (604395). Epigenetic silencing of MSH2 results in a form of HNPCC (see HNPCC8, 613244). Other colorectal cancer syndromes include autosomal recessive adenomatous polyposis (608456), which is caused by mutations in the MUTYH gene (604933), and oligodontia-colorectal cancer syndrome (608615), which is caused by mutations in the AXIN2 gene (604025).
The CHEK2 gene (604373) has been implicated in susceptibility to colorectal cancer in Finnish patients. A germline mutation in the PLA2G2A gene (172411) was identified in a patient with colorectal cancer.
Germline susceptibility loci for colorectal cancer have also been identified. CRCS1 (608812) is conferred by mutation in the GALNT12 gene (610290) on chromosome 9q22; CRCS2 (611469) maps to chromosome 8q24; CRCS3 (612229) is conferred by variation in the SMAD7 gene (602932) on chromosome 18; CRCS4 (601228) is conferred by variation on 15q that causes increased and ectopic expression of the GREM1 gene (603054); CRCS5 (612230) maps to chromosome 10p14; CRCS6 (612231) maps to chromosome 8q23; CRCS7 (612232) maps to chromosome 11q23; CRCS8 (612589) maps to chromosome 14q22; CRCS9 (612590) maps to 16q22; CRCS10 (612591) is conferred by mutation in the POLD1 gene (174761) on chromosome 19q13; CRCS11 (612592) maps to chromosome 20p12; and CRCS12 (615083) is conferred by mutation in the POLE gene (174762) on chromosome 12q24.
Somatic mutations in many different genes, including KRAS (190070), PIK3CA (171834), BRAF (164757), CTNNB1 (116806), FGFR3 (134934), AXIN2 (604025), AKT1 (164730), MCC (159350), MYH11 (160745), PARK2 (602544), RNF43 (612482), and BUB1 (601452) have been identified in colorectal cancer.
Colon cancer is a well-known feature of familial polyposis coli. Cancer of the colon occurred in 7 members of 4 successive generations of the family reported by Kluge (1964), leading him to suggest a simple genetic basis for colonic cancer independent of polyposis. The combination of colonic and endometrial cancer has been observed in many families (e.g., Williams, 1978).
Sivak et al. (1981) studied a kindred with the familial cancer syndrome in which every confirmed affected member had at least 1 primary carcinoma of the colon. The average age at which cancer appeared was 38 years. Multiple primary neoplasms occurred in 23% of cancer patients.
Budd and Fink (1981) reported a family with a high frequency of mucoid colonic carcinoma. Since endometrial carcinoma, atypical endometrial hyperplasia, uterine leiomyosarcoma, bladder transitional carcinoma, and renal cell carcinoma also occurred in the family, this may be the same disorder as the Lynch cancer family syndrome type II (120435).
Bamezai et al. (1984) reported an Indian Sikh kindred in which 8 persons suffered from cancer of the cecum, not associated with polyposis.
Burt et al. (1985) studied a large Utah kindred called to attention because of occurrence of colorectal cancer in a brother, a sister, and a nephew. No clear inheritance pattern was discernible until systematic screening was undertaken for colonic polyps using flexible proctosigmoidoscopy. One or more adenomatous polyps were found in 41 of 191 family members (21%) and 12 of 132 controls (9%)--p less than 0.005. Pedigree analysis showed best fit with autosomal dominant inheritance. Cannon-Albright et al. (1988) extended the studies with investigations of 33 additional kindreds. The kindreds were selected through either a single person with an adenomatous polyp or a cluster of relatives with colonic cancer. The kindreds all had common colorectal cancers, not the rare inherited condition of familial polyposis coli or nonpolyposis inherited colorectal cancer. Likelihood analysis strongly supported dominant inheritance of a susceptibility to colorectal adenomas and cancers, with a gene frequency of 19%. According to the most likely genetic model, adenomatous polyps and colorectal cancers occur only in genetically susceptible persons; however, the 95% confidence interval for this proportion was 53 to 100%.
Ponz de Leon et al. (1992) analyzed data on 605 families of probands with colorectal cancer in the province of Modena in Italy. Among the 577 presumed nonpolyposis cases, both parents had colorectal cancer in 11, one parent in 130, and neither parent in 436. Segregation was compatible with dominant transmission of susceptibility to cancer.
Mecklin (1987) investigated the frequency of hereditary colorectal cancer among all colorectal cancer patients diagnosed in 1 Finnish county during the 1970s. The cancer family syndrome type of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma emerged as the most common verifiable risk factor, involving between 3.8 and 5.5% of all colorectal cancer patients. The frequencies of familial adenomatosis and ulcerative colitis were 0.2% and 0.6%, respectively. The observed frequency is probably an underestimate. The patients with cancer family syndrome were young, accounting for 29 to 39% of the patients under 50 years of age, and their tumors were located predominantly (65%) in the right hemicolon.
**Esophageal carcinoma, somatic, 133239 (3)**
Esophageal cancer, particularly esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), is one of the most common cancers worldwide. Both environmental and genetic risk factors play a role in the pathogenesis of the disorder. In Europe and North America, heavy smoking, alcohol consumption, and increased body mass index (BMI) are the main environmental risk factors. In contrast, the particularly high incidence of ESCC in some areas of China, central Asia, and southern Africa is associated with nutritional deficiencies, high intake of nitrosamine-rich or pickled vegetables, and low socioeconomic status; smoking, alcohol consumption, and BMI play a lesser role in these populations. There is a tendency for familial aggregation of ESCC in high-risk geographic areas, suggesting a genetic component to increased susceptibility. Gastric cardia adenocarcinoma is another common type of cancer in China that shows similarities to ESCC in terms of geographic distribution and environmental risk factors (summary by Wang et al., 2010 and Abnet et al., 2010).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Susceptibility to Esophageal Cancer
See a variant in the ADH1B gene (103720.0001) for discussion of a possible genetic association with protection against squamous cell aerodigestive tract cancer, including esophageal cancer, in alcohol drinkers. See a variant in the ALDH2 gene (100650.0001) for discussion of a possible genetic association with increased risk for esophageal cancer in alcohol drinkers due to interaction between variants in the ADH1B and ALDH2 genes.
See the S100A14 gene (607986) on chromosome 1q21 for a discussion of a possible association between variation in that gene and susceptibility to esophageal squamous cell carcinoma among smokers.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Somatic Mutations in Esophageal Cancer
Somatic mutations in several different genes have been found in esophageal cancer tissue. These genes include TP53 (191170), CDKN2A (600160), DEC1 (604767), DCC (120470), DLEC1 (604050), TGFBR2 (190182), LZTS1 (606551), RNF6 (604242), WWOX (605131), APC (611731), and RUNX3 (600210).
**Gaze palsy, familial horizontal, with progressive scoliosis, 2, 617542 (3), AR**
Jamuar et al. (2017) reported 2 brothers, born of consanguineous Mexican parents, and an unrelated girl, born of consanguineous Saudi Arabian parents, with a similar disorder characterized by global developmental delay, delayed walking, intellectual disability, horizontal gaze palsy, and childhood-onset progressive scoliosis. Brain imaging showed agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC), absence of the anterior and hippocampal commissures, hypoplasia of the pons and midbrain, and midline cleft throughout the brainstem, contributing to a butterfly-shaped medulla. In addition, the boys showed hypotonia and mirror movements, although the girl did not. One of the boys had hyperreflexia and ankle clonus. The boys could walk independently and speak in full sentences, whereas the girl had an unsteady gait and used only single words. Diffusion MRI from the Saudi Arabian girl showed striking abnormalities, including no commissural tracts, misguided Probst bundles along the lateral ventricles, disorganized white matter tracts, and decreased axonal integrity and myelination compared to controls. Associational and subcortical fiber tracts were also abnormal, and fibers were arranged in a radial fashion. There was also failure of the superior cerebellar peduncles to decussate and absence of transverse pontine fibers. Associational and subcortical fiber tracts were also abnormal. The parents who were assessed did not show mirror movements, suggesting variability or incomplete penetrance.
**Mirror movements 1 and/or agenesis of the corpus callosum, 157600 (3), AD**
Mirror movements are contralateral involuntary movements that mirror voluntary ones. Whereas mirror movements are occasionally found in normal young children, persistence beyond the age of 10 years is abnormal. Congenital mirror movements tend to persist throughout adulthood and tend to occur more commonly in the upper extremities (summary by Sharafaddinzadeh et al., 2008 and Srour et al., 2010). Some patients with DCC mutations have agenesis of the corpus callosum (Marsh et al., 2017).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Mirror Movements
See also MRMV2 (614508), caused by mutation in the RAD51 gene (179617) on chromosome 15q15; MRMV3 (606059), caused by mutation in the DNAL4 gene (610565) on chromosome 22q13; and MRMV4 (618264), caused by mutation in the NTN1 gene (601614) on chromosome 17p13.
According to Rosemary Harvey (2008), the biographer of William Bateson (1861-1926), Bateson carried on a conversation with H. Drinkwater concerning this condition, which he referred to as bimanual synergia. The patient was a boy who seemed normal in all respects except for the movements of his 2 hands and the sensation in his arms. He could not flex or extend the fingers of one hand without making the same movements with the other hand. Drinkwater found that the condition was hereditary and was transmitted through the mother who herself was normal. The patient's maternal aunt could control the synergic movements but only by a strong effort. The boy's brother had shown the condition in childhood but grew out of it in his early teens and recovered completely. If the boy felt a painful stimulus on one side, he immediately felt it in the same part of the other hand or arm. Drinkwater was said to have sent information on this case to the Neurological Section of the International Medical Congress meeting in London in 1913. In later correspondence, Drinkwater concluded that his pedigree of bimanual synergia did not follow mendelian rules.
Sharafaddinzadeh et al. (2008) reported the 5-generation pedigree of a large Persian-speaking family from the Isfahan province of southeast Iran. There were 17 affected members of this family segregating this autosomal dominant trait with incomplete penetrance. There were far more males than females, with a 12 to 5 male-to-female ratio. All affected family members had otherwise completely normal neurologic and psychiatric examinations and brain and cervical MRI. Mirror movements were confirmed by electromyography.
Srour et al. (2009) reported a 4-generation pedigree segregating autosomal dominant congenital mirror movements not associated with other neurologic abnormalities. The family was a French Canadian family originating from the Lanaudiere region of Quebec. There was no known consanguinity. Transmission was autosomal dominant with high but incomplete penetrance. Penetrance was higher in males, with a male-to-female ratio of 9 to 2. Mirror movements were present in the hands, fingers, and forearms of all affected individuals: upon voluntary activation of one hand, the contralateral hand would mirror both simple and complex movements such as writing, typing, and tapping. Three individuals reported mirror movements in the toes and feet which were observable during foot tapping and movement of the toes. In most, mirror movements were noted at birth or infancy, and persisted unchanged throughout life. Half could partially suppress the movements. Despite often high amplitude of usually observable movements, patients functioned essentially normally. One patient worked successfully as an electrician performing high precision bimanual tasks, and another worked as a secretary and could type rapidly. Three reported mild clumsiness during childhood. Several reported social impairment, stating that they felt conspicuous or embarrassed by their muscle movements. Neurologic exam was otherwise normal in all. One had a normal MRI of the brain and cervical cord.
Depienne et al. (2011) reported a 3-generation Italian family in which 4 individuals had mirror movements of the arms and hands with onset in infancy or early childhood. Affected individuals had difficulty in fine bimanual movements, and 1 reported pain and muscle cramping during sustained manual activities. Only 1 patient reported some improvement during childhood; none required treatment.
Clinical Variability
Meneret et al. (2014) reported a family with mirror movements associated with a heterozygous truncating mutation in the DCC gene (R275X; 120470.0006). In a reassessment of this family, Marsh et al. (2017) found that partial or complete agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC) also segregated with the mutation. Two patients with mirror movements had partial agenesis of the corpus callosum, whereas a family member without mirror movements had complete agenesis of the corpus callosum. The family originated from North Africa. The findings indicated that both features are part of the phenotype associated with DCC mutations.
Marsh et al. (2017) reported 3 additional families, 2 from Australia and 1 from North Africa, in which a heterozygous DCC mutation segregated with mirror movements and/or partial or complete agenesis of the corpus callosum. Intellectual abilities of the patients ranged from normal to borderline impaired, and some had specific cognitive impairments, including language delay or visuospatial deficits. Diffusion MRI tractography studies showed that mirror movements were consistently associated with decreased crossing of descending corticospinal tract projections at the pyramidal decussation. ACC was associated with absence of the hippocampal commissure and cingulate gyri, as well as dysmorphic lateral ventricles. The individuals had a more favorable outcome compared to unfavorable developmental outcomes associated with syndromic forms of ACC. Marsh et al. (2017) concluded that prenatal detection of isolated ACC related to a pathogenic DCC mutation is indicative of a lower risk of a poor neurodevelopmental outcome, with implications for genetic counseling.



CSF2RA
**Surfactant metabolism dysfunction, pulmonary, 4, 300770 (3)**
Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis (PAP) is a rare lung disorder in which surfactant-derived lipoproteins accumulate excessively within pulmonary alveoli, causing severe respiratory distress. Three forms of PAP have been described: hereditary (usually congenital), secondary, and acquired. Hereditary PAP is associated with mutations in the CSF2RA gene or in genes encoding surfactant proteins. Secondary PAP develops in conditions in which there are reduced numbers or functional impairment of alveolar macrophages and is associated with inhalation of inorganic dust (silica) or toxic fumes, hematologic malignancies, pharmacologic immunosuppression, infections, and impaired CSF2RB (138960) expression. Acquired PAP (610910), the most common form, usually occurs in adults and is caused by neutralizing autoantibodies to CSF2 (138960) (Martinez-Moczygemba et al., 2008).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of congenital pulmonary surfactant metabolism dysfunction, see SMDP1 (265120).
Martinez-Moczygemba et al. (2008) reported a 4-year-old female with symptoms associated with Turner syndrome and respiratory insufficiency who had been diagnosed with PAP at age 3 years. She had exhibited respiratory failure caused by respiratory syncytial virus pneumonia in the first month of life, with a diagnosis of reactive airways disease. The patient presented with respiratory distress and hypoxemia, with a 'crazy paving' pattern on chest imaging. Open lung biopsy revealed alveolar proteinaceous material without alveolar epithelial hyperplasia or chronic interstitial changes, and bronchoalveolar lavage revealed proteinaceous material and foamy macrophages. ELISA showed no anti-CSF2 antibodies and elevated baseline CSF2 serum levels. Exogenous CSF2 administration, which may be efficacious in some patients with acquired PAP, resulted in no clinical improvement.
Suzuki et al. (2008) reported 2 sisters with PAP. The index patient presented at age 6 years with a 2-year history of progressive tachypnea and failure to thrive. Both parents were well developed and healthy with no history of lung disease. Examination of the patient revealed moderate tachypnea, mild tachycardia, and inspiratory crackles. Pulmonary function testing showed severe restrictive impairment. Oxygen saturation was 88% while breathing room air and decreased while talking or walking a short distance. PAP diagnosis was suspected based on chest radiography and confirmed by histopathologic examination of lung tissue. CSF2 autoantibodies were absent. Serum SPD (SFTPD; 178635) was increased in the patient compared with her parents and controls. The patient's 8-year-old sister, who was thought to be healthy, also had increased serum SPD. Subsequent clinical evaluation revealed that the sister had poor growth, a diffusion capacity for carbon dioxide of 57% that predicted, and mild patchy ground glass opacities throughout both lungs, consistent with a diagnosis of PAP.



SIK1
**Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 30, 616341 (3), AD**
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy-30 (DEE30) is a severe neurologic disorder characterized by onset of refractory seizures soon after birth or in the first months of life. Seizure types include early myoclonic encephalopathy (EME), Ohtahara syndrome, and infantile spasms; most are refractory to treatment. Patients with earlier seizure onset make essentially no developmental progress and may die in infancy. Those with later onset show profoundly impaired global development with absent speech, poor eye contact, inability to walk, behavioral abnormalities, and feeding difficulties that may require a feeding tube (summary by Hansen et al., 2015).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of DEE, see 308350.
Hansen et al. (2015) reported 6 unrelated children with a severe neurodevelopmental disorder associated with early-onset refractory epilepsy. Seizure onset occurred shortly after birth or within the first months of life and included myoclonic, generalized tonic-clonic, and atonic seizures, as well as infantile spasms. All patients had severely delayed psychomotor development. Two patients died in infancy, and the 4 who survived showed severe cognitive impairment with poor or absent speech and autistic features. EEG showed variable abnormalities, such as burst suppression patterns, multifocal spikes, slowed background activity, and hypsarrhythmia. Brain imaging, when performed, was normal. Additional features included abnormal involuntary movements, poor spontaneous movement, poor visual and/or auditory responses, bruxism, poor feeding, and respiratory insufficiency.



TJP2
**Cholestasis, progressive familial intrahepatic 4, 615878 (3), AR**
Sambrotta et al. (2014) reported 12 patients from 8 families with early childhood onset of severe progressive liver disease. One child died at age 13 months, 9 patients required a liver transplant, and 2 had stable liver disease with mild portal hypertension at ages 4 and 7 years, respectively. Laboratory studies showed normal or mildly increased GGT levels. No additional clinical details were given. Most of the families were consanguineous.
Zhou et al. (2015) reported 2 patients with PFIC4 who developed hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The first was a 26-month-old Caucasian female who had had intermittent jaundice of neonatal onset and normal GGT. She presented in acute liver failure. CT scan showed innumerable well-defined hepatic masses. Serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP; 104150) was 171,000 ng/mL, and liver biopsy found moderately differentiated HCC in a background of chronic cholestatic hepatitis with cirrhosis. The patient died 3 weeks after admission. An autopsy confirmed multifocal HCC. The second patient was a 6-month-old Caucasian male referred for persistent cholestasis with near-normal GGT after hepatoportoenterostomy for presumed biliary atresia. Icterus resolved by 19 months, but a growing lesion in the right liver lobe, with rising serum AFP, prompted liver transplantation at 2 years of age. The explanted liver was cirrhotic, with multiple cholestatic nodules and a single, well-encapsulated 2-cm tumor that diffusely expressed AFP and glypican-3 (300037); a central region of well-differentiated HCC was found. The patient was well post 2 years transplantation. Zhou et al. (2015) concluded that mutations in TJP2 resulting in progressive intrahepatic cholestasis may predispose to hepatocellular carcinoma in early childhood, warranting close monitoring and early liver transplantation.
**Hypercholanemia, familial, 607748 (3), AR**
Familial hypercholanemia is characterized by elevated serum bile acid concentrations, itching, and fat malabsorption (Morton et al., 2000; Shneider et al., 1997). Carlton et al. (2003) identified 17 individuals with familial hypercholanemia in 12 families of Lancaster County Old Order Amish descent. Serum bile acid concentration in affected individuals fluctuated, being often very high but occasionally normal. Fat malabsorption, reflecting low intestinal bile acid levels, manifested by failure to thrive, potentially life-threatening vitamin K-dependent coagulopathy, and rickets. Symptoms usually responded to treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA). Familial hypercholanemia is atypical for a liver disease; test results of biochemical markers of liver injury were normal, except for alkaline phosphatase activity, which sometimes rose. Liver biopsy findings varied; 1 untreated individual had canalicular cholestasis and 2 individuals receiving UDCA had minimally active chronic hepatitis. Several older individuals had become symptom-free and discontinued UDCA treatment.



TCF3
**Agammaglobulinemia 8, autosomal dominant, 616941 (3), AD**
Dobbs et al. (2011) and Boisson et al. (2013) reported 4 unrelated patients who presented in the first years of life with severe infections, including pneumococcal meningitis, recurrent otitis, vaccine-associated polio, and arthritis. Laboratory studies showed severely decreased levels of serum immunoglobulins and less than 3% of CD19+ circulating B cells. The B cells showed high-intensity expression of CD19, but absence of the B-cell receptor (BCR). Bone marrow biopsy from 2 patients showed a severe reduction in the number of pro- and pre-B cells. Detailed analysis of patient B cells showed that they did not bear surface immunoglobulins.



UGT2B17
**{Bone mineral density QTL 12, osteoporosis}, 612560 (3)**



PC
**Thrombophilia due to protein C deficiency, autosomal dominant, 176860 (3), AD**
Heterozygous protein C deficiency is characterized by recurrent venous thrombosis. However, many adults with heterozygous disease may be asymptomatic (Millar et al., 2000). Individuals with decreased amounts of protein C are classically referred to as having type I deficiency and those with normal amounts of a functionally defective protein as having type II deficiency (Bertina et al., 1984).
Acquired protein C deficiency is a clinically similar disorder caused by development of an antibody against protein C. Clouse and Comp (1986) reviewed the structural and functional properties of protein C and discussed both hereditary and acquired deficiency of protein C.
Griffin et al. (1981) reported a 22-year-old Caucasian man with recurrent thrombophlebitis complicated by pulmonary embolism. His 56-year-old father had thrombophlebitis with pulmonary embolism following a minor leg injury at age 24, a cerebrovascular accident at age 43, and a myocardial infarction at age 45. A paternal uncle had thrombophlebitis and recurrent pulmonary emboli dating from age 20. The paternal grandfather died abruptly at age 45 after developing pulmonary infiltrates while confined to bed due to a leg injury in a fall from a horse. The paternal great-grandfather died unexpectedly of a cerebrovascular accident at age 61. The propositus, his father, and his paternal uncle showed decreased levels of plasma protein C antigen, determined immunologically by the Laurell rocket technique, that were 38 to 49% of normal values. Clinically unaffected members of the kindred had normal levels.
Bertina et al. (1984) and Barbui et al. (1984) reported families with a discrepancy between normal protein C antigen levels and low functional activity of protein C. The proband in the latter report was a man with myocardial infarction at age 28 and severe thrombotic episodes thereafter, including cerebral thrombophlebitis, and both superficial and deep venous thrombosis of the leg. Although no other member of the family had a history of thromboses, the father also was found to have decreased functional activity of protein C. Immunoelectrophoretic studies showed an abnormal migration pattern of the protein, which the authors termed 'protein C Bergamo.'
Using an immunologic and a functional assay, Horellou et al. (1984) identified 22 patients from 9 French families with protein C deficiency. Six were asymptomatic, 15 had a history of venous thromboembolism, and 1 had a history of arterial thromboembolism. The first thrombotic episode occurred at a mean age of 24.1 years. Five patients (56%) had absence of a precipitating condition. One patient with severe protein C deficiency developed skin necrosis soon after starting oral anticoagulant treatment. Family history suggested autosomal dominant transmission of the defect.
Israels and Seshia (1987) described stroke in a 17-month-old girl with heterozygous protein C deficiency.
In a large New England kindred, Bovill et al. (1989) found a strong statistical correlation between thromboembolic disease and heterozygous protein C deficiency. On the other hand, they found no thromboembolic manifestations in many protein C-deficient family members, indicating that some factors other than heterozygous protein C deficiency must play an important role in the clinical expression.
Berdeaux et al. (1993) described 11 subjects from 3 families with dysfunctional protein C, or type II deficiency, characterized by a disproportionate decrease in protein C activity compared to the amount of antigen. In their own series, 4 of the 11 patients were symptomatic. They compared the findings in these subjects with those in 67 reported patients, including 39 symptomatic and 28 asymptomatic, with dysfunctional protein C deficiency.
In a study in the Netherlands, Allaart et al. (1993) found a significant difference in the thrombosis-free survival of 77 heterozygotes and 84 controls in the same families: by age 45, 50% of the heterozygotes and 10% of normal relatives had a manifestation of venous thromboembolism. Thrombotic events occurred more often in years in which the patient had been immobile for more than a week or had had surgery. There was no predisposing event such as surgery or pregnancy in 50% of all first episodes and 65% of recurrences of venous thromboembolism in the heterozygotes.
Acquired Protein C Deficiency
Using an electroimmunoassay, Mannucci and Vigano (1982) evaluated acquired protein C deficiency in conditions associated with an increased tendency to thrombosis.
Mitchell et al. (1987) described a fatal thrombophilia associated with the development of an antibody to protein C. Acquired nonmendelian autoimmune phenocopies are known for several other disorders, including dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (226600), hemophilia A (306700), hereditary angioedema (106100), and von Willebrand disease (see 193400).
Gruppo et al. (2000) reported a 20-month-old child with acquired protein C deficiency who had a stroke while receiving valproic acid for a seizure disorder. They studied 20 children on valproic acid therapy and 20 children receiving other anticonvulsants and found that protein C levels were reduced to less than 5% of normal in up to 45% of the children receiving valproic acid.
**Thrombophilia due to protein C deficiency, autosomal recessive, 612304 (3), AR**
Autosomal recessive protein C deficiency resulting from homozygous or compound heterozygous PROC mutations is a thrombotic condition that can manifest as a severe neonatal disorder or as a milder disorder with late-onset thrombophilia (Millar et al., 2000).
Branson et al. (1983) reported a newborn male infant with intractable purpura fulminans, which reflected massive subcutaneous thrombosis. His mother had heterozygous protein C deficiency. This was the first instance in which protein C deficiency was implicated in disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
Seligsohn et al. (1984) studied an Arab-Israeli family in which 2 sibs with first-cousin parents died with massive venous thrombosis in the neonatal period. Both parents and several other relatives, who were heterozygous carriers, had had no thrombotic episodes.
Marlar (1985) diagnosed complete deficiency of protein C in 5 infants. The major symptom was massive subcutaneous thrombosis that usually started within the first 24 hours of life.
Peters et al. (1988) described a patient with neonatal purpura fulminans and severe bilateral vitreous hemorrhages. The patient showed reduced protein C antigen levels with undetectable activity levels. Infusions of fresh frozen plasma were given for 8 months.
Gruppo et al. (1988) reported a child who had renal vein thrombosis as a newborn and iliofemoral thrombosis at the age of 6 years. Protein C levels and anticoagulant activity were decreased to 47% and 14% of normal, respectively. A 3-year-old asymptomatic sib had a similar reduction of PROC anticoagulant activity. The mother had type I protein C deficiency with a proportionate reduction in immunologic protein levels (59%) and anticoagulant activity (52%), whereas the father had type II PROCC deficiency with normal immunologic protein levels (102%), and low anticoagulant function (50%). Electrophoretic studies showed an abnormal protein C in the father and both children. Gruppo et al. (1988) concluded that the children were compound heterozygous for the 2 different types of PROC deficiency inherited from each of the parents.
Tuddenham et al. (1989) reported a consanguineous family in which 2 members had homozygous protein C deficiency. Both presented in the second half of their first year of life with recurrent rapidly disappearing ecchymotic skin lesions, DIC, and venous thrombosis. The authors noted that homozygous deficiency usually presents in the neonatal period. Successful treatment was achieved by frequent infusions of plasma or prothrombin complex with warfarin maintenance.
Dreyfus et al. (1991) stated that at least 19 cases of life-threatening neonatal thrombosis and purpura fulminans had been described.
Fong et al. (2010) reported 2 sisters with autosomal recessive protein C deficiency who had extensive bilateral periventricular hemorrhagic infarction causing spastic cerebral palsy. The older sister presented at 20 months with cortical visual blindness, spastic diplegia, and purpura fulminans. The younger sister presented at age 3 days with apneas and multifocal seizures. At age 2 years, she had global developmental delay, cortical visual blindness, spastic quadriplegia, epilepsy, and purpura fulminans. Neuroimaging of both sibs showed findings consistent with bilateral cerebral intramedullary venous thrombosis occurring at under 28 weeks' gestation for the older sister and around time of birth for the younger sister. Laboratory studies showed severe qualitative reduction in plasma protein C anticoagulant activity.
Clinical Variability
Melissari and Kakkar (1989) reported 2 unrelated families in which 4 adults had severe protein C deficiency with less than or equal to 5% of normal plasma levels. Newborn deaths were reported in the first family but not in the second family. Adult patients developed thrombotic symptoms mainly in their early twenties, characterized by recurrent superficial and deep iliofemoral vein thromboses and pulmonary emboli. Other clinical features included generalized peritonitis due to massive mesenteric vein thrombosis, thrombosis of the cavernous sinus, renal vein thrombosis, and priapism. In the second family, 5 individuals died of intravascular abdominal thrombosis at about 40 years of age. Massive thromboembolic episodes were associated with a compensated DIC syndrome. Clinical symptoms could be controlled by long-term administration of low molecular weight heparin alone or in combination with low dose warfarin.
Tripodi et al. (1990) reported a family in which 2 protein C deficiency homozygotes with similarly low protein C levels had mild disease. One had recurrent venous thrombosis starting at the age of 28 years, and the other was still asymptomatic at 38 years despite exposure to thrombotic risk factors. A review of 13 additional homozygotes revealed a highly variable phenotypic expression, which the authors subdivided into 2 groups. In the first group, affected homozygotes from 8 kindreds presented at birth with unmeasurable protein C levels and life-threatening thrombosis, whereas affected homozygous individuals of 1 kindred had very low levels of protein C and delayed onset of thrombosis at about 10 months of age. In a second group of 4 kindreds, homozygotes had very low, but measurable, protein C levels and survived into adulthood with histories of moderately severe thrombosis. Tripodi et al. (1990) noted that the findings in their family demonstrated that protein C levels lower than 10% are compatible with a negative history for thrombosis, not only in the neonatal period but also during adulthood. These results suggested that other factors need to interact for full clinical penetrance of the defect in some homozygotes.
**Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency, 266150 (3), AR**
PC deficiency may be categorized into 3 phenotypic subgroups. Patients from North America ('group A') have lactic acidemia and psychomotor retardation, whereas those from France and the United Kingdom ('group B') have a more complex biochemical phenotype with increased serum lactate, ammonia, citrulline, and lysine, as well as an intracellular redox disturbance in which the cytosolic compartment is more reduced and the mitochondrial compartment is more oxidized. Patients in group B have decreased survival compared to group A, and usually do not survive beyond 3 months of age (Robinson et al., 1987). Group C is relatively benign.
North American Phenotype ('Group A')
Tada et al. (1969) reported a family in which 2 sisters were presumably affected with the same physical and mental retardation. The proband had elevated serum alanine and pyruvate, normal SGPT and liver pyruvate decarboxylase activities, but decreased activity of pyruvate carboxylase. Hyperalaninemia was likely secondary to the increased level of pyruvate.
Delvin et al. (1972) noted that 2 forms of pyruvate carboxylase exist in liver, one with a high Km and the other with a low Km for pyruvate. They reported a patient with abnormality of gluconeogenesis and elevated plasma levels of pyruvate, lactate, and alanine in which the low Km enzyme was deficient.
Atkin et al. (1979) reported a child with lactic acidosis, severe mental and developmental retardation, and proximal renal acidosis. Laboratory studies showed severe hepatic, renal cortical, and cerebral deficiencies of pyruvate carboxylase activity. Postmortem neuropathologic examination revealed no signs of Leigh syndrome (256000), but developmental and degenerative lesions were observed. Oizumi et al. (1983) reported a patient with PC deficiency associated with renal tubular acidosis and cystinuria.
Haworth et al. (1981) reported 2 unrelated Canadian Indian infants with PC deficiency. Both presented in infancy with metabolic acidosis. Laboratory findings included increased plasma lactate, pyruvate, glutamic acid, proline, and alanine, and low PC activity in skin fibroblasts and liver. Both survived until at least 2 years of age with severe mental retardation.
Gilbert et al. (1983) reported a case of Leigh necrotizing encephalopathy due to pyruvate carboxylase deficiency.
Carbone et al. (1998) studied 11 males and 6 females from several Canadian Indian populations. Presentation was at birth in 7, and 1 to 8.5 months in 10. Presenting signs included metabolic acidosis in 10, seizures in 5, respiratory distress in 4, pneumonia in 3, and hypotonia in 3. The clinical course was characterized by frequent lactic acidosis, severe developmental delay, and muscular hypotonia in 17, seizures in 8, hypoglycemia in 4, and other CNS involvement (clonus or athetosis) in 4. Eleven patients died between ages 3 months and 4.75 years; 6 were surviving at ages ranging from 3 months to 19 years.
'French form' ('Group B')
The second form of PC deficiency, reported particularly from France, presents early with lactic acidosis, but also shows elevated blood levels of ammonia, citrulline, proline, and lysine. In addition, there is an intracellular redox disturbance, with increased lactate/pyruvate and acetoacetate/beta-hydroxybutyrate ratios.
Saudubray et al. (1976) reported 2 familial cases of neonatal congenital lactic acidosis with liver PC deficiency. Disease onset was immediately after birth, characterized by major neurologic symptoms, hyperammonemia, and hyperketonemia. Hyperlactic acidemia was associated with an increased lactate/pyruvate ratio and an increased acetoacetate/beta-hydroxybutyrate ratio. The authors suggested that the unusual metabolic pattern resulted from decreased oxaloacetate synthesis resulting from PC deficiency and impaired oxaloacetate-dependent mitochondrial redox shuttles. The disease course was rapidly fatal. Coude et al. (1981) and Bartlett et al. (1984) also reported patients with the group B type of PC deficiency.
Robinson et al. (1984) reported 8 patients from 7 families from Canada with pyruvate carboxylase deficiency. Five were of full Amerindian descent, 2 were unrelated Caucasians, and 1 was the offspring of related Egyptian parents. All presented from soon after birth to age 5 months with chronic metabolic acidosis, and 4 had at least 1 episode of hypoglycemia. Six patients died by age 2 years (range 10 days to 2 years), and the 2 living patients were mentally and physically retarded. Using (3)H-biotin labeling and (35)S-streptavidin to detect biotin-containing proteins, and immunodetection with PC antibodies, Robinson et al. (1984) distinguished 2 groups of patients: group 'A' synthesized PC subunits with a normal molecular mass and recognized by antibodies against PC, but showed very little enzymatic activity, (termed CRM(+ve) or type I), whereas group 'B' had no detectable PC subunits and no protein recognized by the antibody (termed CRM(-ve), or type II). The 2 patients with CRM(-ve) results, the Egyptian patient and 1 of the Caucasian patients, had additional biochemical features, including hyperammonemia, citrullinemia, lysinemia, and altered redox states (in 1 patient) similar to the features of patients reported in France. These 2 patients also died early (10 days and 7 weeks) and had hepatomegaly due to excessive fat storage. Robinson et al. (1984) concluded that the 2 subtle types of PC deficiency result from 2 different mutations in the PC gene, 1 that synthesizes an inactive protein and 1 that results in lack of protein expression.
In a follow-up study of cultured skin fibroblasts from 16 patients with either French or American PC deficiency, Robinson et al. (1987) confirmed that the North American cases are associated with the presence of a mature biotin-containing protein of the correct molecular weight. Three families with the French presentation had absence of immunoreactive PC protein and PC mRNA; however, another 3 families with the French presentation had evidence of protein production as well as PC mRNA. Robinson et al. (1987) concluded that when a PC enzyme is produced in French cases, it has no activity.
Pineda et al. (1995) reported an infant with what they termed the 'French' type of pyruvate carboxylase deficiency, with somewhat less severity. The initial neonatal symptoms were respiratory distress, severe metabolic acidosis, and a tendency to hypoglycemia. At age 6 months, he presented with acute neurologic symptoms, lactic acidosis, and hyperammonemia, and died of pneumonia, cardiac failure, and renal insufficiency. Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency was confirmed by enzymatic studies. Postmortem analysis showed periventricular cysts and diffuse hypomyelination.
Brun et al. (1999) reported brother and sister with the severe form of PC deficiency. Both had macrocephaly and severe ischemia-like brain lesions at birth and died in the first week of life with intractable lactic acidemia. In the girl, increased head circumference and periventricular leukomalacia were detected on fetal ultrasonography at 29.4 weeks of gestation. PC activity in cultured skin fibroblasts was less than 2% of control. The lesions were detected at a time of maximal periventricular metabolic demand. Brun et al. (1999) postulated that energy deprivation induced by PC deficiency impairs astrocytic buffering capacity against excitotoxic insult and compromises normal microvascular morphogenesis and autoregulation, both mechanisms leading to cystic degeneration of the periventricular white matter. The authors noted that discovery of cystic periventricular leukomalacia on cerebral ultrasound at birth in a newborn presenting with primary lactic acidemia is highly suggestive of PC deficiency.
'Benign' type ('Group C')
Van Coster et al. (1991) reported a 7-year-old girl with metabolic and biochemical features of the North American type of PC deficiency who had a benign disease course with preservation of motor and mental abilities. She had several episodes of metabolic acidosis with elevated lactate, pyruvate, alanine, beta-hydroxybutyrate, acetoacetate, lysine, and proline values, which were well-managed by rehydration and bicarbonate therapy. PC activity was 1.8% of normal, and she was CRM(+ve). The authors commented on the unique phenotypic expression in this patient.
Schiff et al. (2006) reported a patient with atypical PC deficiency and long survival. He presented at 3 days of age with acute ketoacidosis, tachypnea, and hypotonia. Laboratory studies showed lactacidemia with normal plasma amino acids and ammonia. After successful treatment, he was discharged with an increased lactate-to-pyruvate ratio and avoidance of fasting was advised. During the first 2 years of life, he had mild psychomotor delay and failure to thrive with intermittent acute decompensation. PC activity in cultured skin fibroblasts was severely decreased, leading to the correct diagnosis. Brain MRI at age 18 months showed bilateral high signal intensities in frontoparietal subcortical white matter. At the time of the report, he was 9 years old and showed mild and global psychomotor delay with dysarthria and dysgraphia. Treatment included biotin, L-carnitine, sodium bicarbonate, sodium citrate, and avoidance of fasting. Schiff et al. (2006) noted that relatively long survival into childhood is not a frequent finding for this usually very severe disease.



SLC38A8
**Foveal hypoplasia 2, with or without optic nerve misrouting and/or anterior segment dysgenesis, 609218 (3), AR**
Foveal hypoplasia is defined as the lack of foveal depression with continuity of all neurosensory retinal layers in the presumed foveal area. Foveal hypoplasia as an isolated entity is a rare phenomenon; it is usually described in association with other ocular disorders, such as aniridia (106210), microphthalmia (see 251600), albinism (see 203100), or achromatopsia (see 216900). All reported cases of foveal hypoplasia have been accompanied by decreased visual acuity and nystagmus (summary by Perez et al., 2014).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of foveal hypoplasia, see FVH1 (136520).
Pal et al. (2004) described foveal hypoplasia and anterior segment dysgenesis in a large consanguineous pedigree. Five members of the pedigree presented with nystagmus and poor vision. The parents were unaffected. The combination of developmental abnormalities in both anterior and posterior eye structures suggested a defect in early ocular development and morphogenesis.
Van Genderen et al. (2006) reported 2 Afghan sisters and a Dutch girl with foveal hypoplasia and optic chiasm misrouting, but no albinism. The Dutch girl had previously been diagnosed with Kartagener syndrome (see 244400). All 3 patients exhibited nystagmus, and fundus examination showed absence of the usual foveal hyperpigmentation, foveal avascular zone, and macular and foveal reflexes, with small retinal vessels extending through the presumed macular area. The exit angles of the main temporal arteries were below the mean -2 SD of those seen in albino patients and well within the range of angles in controls. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) in the Dutch girl showed extension of all neurosensory retinal layers through the area in which the fovea would normally be located; no clivus, anticlivus, or foveal pit could be seen. Visual evoked potential (VEP) recordings yielded chiasmal coefficients significantly indicative of misrouting in all 3 patients. The affected girls were all dark haired with dark brown eyes and no iris transillumination; the Dutch girl tanned normally and the Afghan sisters had skin color similar to that of other family members. Parents and sibs in both families were unaffected.
Vincent et al. (2009) described a father and 2 daughters with foveal hypoplasia from a highly consanguineous Indian family. All 3 patients had poor vision, horizontal pendular nystagmus, and alternating esotropia, with normal color vision. Fundus examination of the 40-year-old father showed a poorly defined foveal zone in both eyes and a large typical inferior chorioretinal coloboma in the right eye; in addition, the axial length in both eyes was less than 19 mm, consistent with microphthalmia. In his 9-year-old and 6-year-old daughters, fundus examination showed bilateral absence of foveal reflex, and OCT demonstrated absence of foveal pits bilaterally; electroretinographic recordings were normal in both. The older daughter was also diagnosed with bilateral microphthalmia, with axial lengths less than 20 mm in both eyes, whereas in the younger daughter, axial lengths were 20.70 mm and 20.54 mm in the right and left eyes, respectively. The father was born of a consanguineous marriage, and was married to his unaffected niece; there was 1 unaffected daughter. The father's older sister and a paternal aunt and uncle were reported to have poor vision, esotropia, and nystagmus.
Perez et al. (2014) studied 9 patients from 3 apparently unrelated nonconsanguineous Israeli families of Jewish Indian (Mumbai region) ancestry with nystagmus and subnormal vision from infancy. Visual acuities ranged between 20/50 and 20/200; refractive errors were found in all patients and varied between moderate hypermetropia and high myopia. All patients had astigmatism, and 3 had strabismus. All had normal cutaneous and ocular pigmentation and no iris transillumination, and full-field electroretinography and flash VEP testing in 6 patients were within normal limits. Fundus examination in all patients revealed foveal hypoplasia; OCT, performed in 1 patient, showed absence of the normal foveal pit. The 3 affected sisters in 1 family also had mild developmental delay and pervasive developmental disorder-like features.
Al-Araimi et al. (2013) restudied the Pakistani family with foveal hypoplasia and anterior segment dysgenesis originally reported by Pal et al. (2004). Flash VEP in 2 affected family members showed contralateral predominance, indicating increased crossover at optic chiasm. Reexamination of the 2 Afghan sisters who were originally described by van Genderen et al. (2006) revealed posterior embryotoxon in both. Al-Araimi et al. (2013) concluded that both families had the same clinical phenotype, which they designated 'FHONDA' syndrome, representing foveal hypoplasia, optic nerve decussation defects, and anterior segment dysgenesis in the absence of albinism.



MLPH
**Griscelli syndrome, type 3, 609227 (3), AR**
Sanal et al. (2002) reported 2 patients with silver-gray hair, eyebrows, and eyelashes who had large clumps of pigment, typical of Griscelli syndrome, on microscopic analysis of their hair shafts. The patients developed no other manifestations over 6 and 8 years of follow-up, respectively.



ETFA
**Glutaric acidemia IIA, 231680 (3), AR**
Glutaric aciduria II (GA2) is an autosomal recessively inherited disorder of fatty acid, amino acid, and choline metabolism. It differs from GA I (GA1; 231670) in that multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiencies result in large excretion not only of glutaric acid, but also of lactic, ethylmalonic, butyric, isobutyric, 2-methyl-butyric, and isovaleric acids. GA II results from deficiency of any 1 of 3 molecules: the alpha (ETFA) and beta (ETFB) subunits of electron transfer flavoprotein, and electron transfer flavoprotein dehydrogenase (ETFDH). The clinical picture of GA II due to the different defects appears to be indistinguishable; each defect can lead to a range of mild or severe cases, depending presumably on the location and nature of the intragenic lesion, i.e., mutation, in each case (Goodman, 1993; Olsen et al., 2003).
The heterogeneous clinical features of patients with MADD fall into 3 classes: a neonatal-onset form with congenital anomalies (type I), a neonatal-onset form without congenital anomalies (type II), and a late-onset form (type III). The neonatal-onset forms are usually fatal and are characterized by severe nonketotic hypoglycemia, metabolic acidosis, multisystem involvement, and excretion of large amounts of fatty acid- and amino acid-derived metabolites. Symptoms and age at presentation of late-onset MADD are highly variable and characterized by recurrent episodes of lethargy, vomiting, hypoglycemia, metabolic acidosis, and hepatomegaly often preceded by metabolic stress. Muscle involvement in the form of pain, weakness, and lipid storage myopathy also occurs. The organic aciduria in patients with the late-onset form of MADD is often intermittent and only evident during periods of illness or catabolic stress (summary by Frerman and Goodman, 2001).
Importantly, riboflavin treatment has been shown to ameliorate the symptoms and metabolic profiles in many MADD patients, particularly those with type III, the late-onset and mildest form (Liang et al., 2009).
Neonatal Onset
In the son of healthy parents from the same small town in Turkey, Przyrembel et al. (1976) described fatal neonatal acidosis and hypoglycemia with a strong 'sweaty feet' odor. Large amounts of glutaric acid were found in the blood and urine. The defect was tentatively located to the metabolism of a range of acyl-CoA compounds. A possibly identically affected child died earlier.
Lehnert et al. (1982), Bohm et al. (1982), and others described malformations with multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenation deficiency: congenital polycystic kidneys, characteristic facies, etc.
Typical clinical features of the disorder are respiratory distress, muscular hypotonia, sweaty feet odor, hepatomegaly, and death often in the neonatal period. Of the 12 previously reported cases reviewed by Niederwieser et al. (1983), 7 died in the first 5 days of life and only 2 patients survived to ages 5 and 19 years.
Harkin et al. (1986) described apparently characteristic and perhaps pathognomonic, cytoplasmic, homogeneous, and moderately electron-dense membrane-limited bodies in the central nervous system and renal tissues of a female patient who died at age 5 days. The kidneys were enlarged with numerous cortical cysts. Selective proximal tubular damage leads to glycosuria and generalized amino aciduria. The patient came from an inbred Louisiana Cajun community and had a sib who also died in the newborn period.
Patients with severe deficiency of the ETF dehydrogenase type have distinctive congenital malformations, whereas those with ETF deficiency do not; the severity of the metabolic block, rather than its location, and the resulting profound acidosis in utero may disturb normal morphogenesis. Colevas et al. (1988) described the pathologic findings in 2 cases. The pattern of lesions, in particular the striking localization of renal dysplasia to the medulla, suggested that the malformations may be the consequence of an accumulation of toxic metabolites that is not corrected by placental transfer. Other malformations included cerebral pachygyria, pulmonary hypoplasia, and facial dysmorphism. Lipid accumulation was demonstrated in the liver, heart, and renal tubular epithelium, all tissues that use fatty acids as a primary source of energy.
Wilson et al. (1989) found reports of malformations in 8 of 16 cases. The anomalies included macrocephaly, large anterior fontanel, high forehead, flat nasal bridge, telecanthus, and malformed ears. Abnormalities such as hypotonia, cerebral gliosis, heterotopias, hepatomegaly, hepatic periportal necrosis, polycystic kidneys, and genital defects were considered reminiscent of the anomalies in Zellweger syndrome, but elevations of glutaric, ethylmalonic, adipic, and isovaleric acids were considered distinctive for glutaric aciduria type II. Wilson et al. (1989) described a unique ultrastructural change in the glomerular basement membrane which they suggested may represent an early stage in renal cyst formation and provide a diagnostic criterion for glutaric aciduria II when enzyme studies are unavailable.
Poplawski et al. (1999) reported a family in which an unexplained neonatal death had occurred. Twelve years after the death, they retrospectively diagnosed multiple acyl-CoA-dehydrogenase deficiency by demonstrating an abnormal acyl-carnitine profile in the child's archived neonatal screening card, using tandem mass spectrometry.
Angle and Burton (2008) reported 3 unrelated infants with genetically confirmed MADD who experienced sudden acute life-threatening events in the first year of life, resulting in death in 2 infants. All had been correctly diagnosed via a newborn screening protocol. Each developed cardiopulmonary arrest concurrent with metabolic stress or limited caloric intake, including vomiting, upper respiratory infection, and rotaviral diarrhea. Although only 1 patient had a documented arrhythmia, Angle and Burton (2008) suggested that an intrinsic abnormality of myocardial function due to altered energy production may have played a role. The authors emphasized the importance of aggressive nutritional management in infants with MADD.
Later Onset
Hypoglycemia caused by inborn errors of metabolism, including disturbances of organic-acid metabolism, usually appear during infancy or childhood. Thus, the case reported by Dusheiko et al. (1979) was unusual. A 19-year-old woman had episodic vomiting, severe hypoglycemia, and fatty infiltration of the liver. The parents were not related. One of her sisters, at age 7, developed nausea, vomiting, and a 'stale' odor to the breath, and died after 3 days in hypoglycemic coma. At age 10, a second sister was found to have jaundice, hepatomegaly, and hypoglycemia after an acute febrile illness. She recovered from that illness but died 'in her sleep' 2 years later. Excess amounts of glutaric and ethylmalonic acids were found in the urine, consistent with defective dehydrogenation of isovaleryl CoA and butyryl CoA, respectively. These organic acids plus others are excreted in the urine in excess in Jamaican vomiting sickness, caused by the ingestion of unripe akee. Unripe akee contains the toxin hypoglycin, which inhibits several acyl CoA dehydrogenases. Cultured fibroblasts in the patient of Dusheiko et al. (1979) showed reduced ability to oxidize radiolabeled butyrate and lysine.
Mongini et al. (1992) reported a 25-year-old woman who complained of episodes of muscle weakness, nausea and vomiting since the age of 10 years. She had been born with bilateral cataracts and strabismus. Muscle biopsy showed free fatty acid accumulation. Low-fat diet reduced the episodes of muscle weakness.
Horvath et al. (2006) reported 3 unrelated patients with myopathy associated with coenzyme Q10 deficiency: a 32-year-old German woman who developed proximal muscle weakness during pregnancy; a 29-year-old Turkish man who developed difficulty walking and premature fatigue; and a 6-year-old Hungarian boy who had exercise intolerance and generalized hypotonia. All patients had significantly increased serum creatine kinase, increased serum lactate, myopathic changes on EMG, and hypo- or areflexia. None had myoglobinuria, ataxia, or seizures. Muscle biopsies showed lipid storage myopathy, respiratory chain complex deficiencies, and CoQ10 levels below 50% of normal. All 3 patients showed marked improvement after 3 to 6 months of oral CoQ10 supplementation. Gempel et al. (2007) reported follow-up on the patients reported by Horvath et al. (2006). The German woman had developed abnormal liver enzymes and recurrence of muscle weakness, and laboratory studies showed increased multiple acyl-CoA derivatives in serum. The Turkish man had proximal muscle weakness with scapular winging and waddling gait, and laboratory studies were consistent with MADD. Gempel et al. (2007) also reported 5 patients from 3 additional consanguineous families with late-onset MADD manifest as childhood-onset muscle weakness, muscle pain, and increased serum creatine kinase. All 7 patients responded favorably to riboflavin and/or coenzyme Q supplementation. Muscle biopsies showed a myopathy with lipid accumulation and small vacuoles; only 2 patients had ragged-red fibers. All had a decrease of respiratory complex I+III and II+III activity, and all had decreased muscle CoQ10 levels. Molecular analysis identified biallelic pathogenic mutations in the ETFDH gene in all patients (see, e.g., 231675.0007 and 231675.0008), thus confirming the diagnosis of MADD. Gempel et al. (2007) concluded that MADD due to ETFDH mutations can result in isolated myopathy with secondary coenzyme Q10 deficiency.
Liang et al. (2009) reported 4 Taiwanese patients from 3 unrelated families with MADD due to mutations in the ETFDH gene (231675.0003-231675.0005). There was marked phenotypic variability, even between 2 affected sibs with the same genotype. The first patient was a 27-year-old woman who had exercise intolerance since early childhood. In her teens, she developed several episodes of acute pancreatitis. At age 19, she developed dysphagia with progressive weakness of neck and proximal limb muscles, and later had a more severe episode of muscle weakness with acute respiratory failure, but no metabolic acidosis and hypoketotic hypoglycemia. Serum creatine kinase was elevated, and muscle biopsy showed increased lipid droplets predominantly in type 1 fibers. Urinary profile was consistent with MADD. Her older sister had a milder phenotype, with 2 bouts of muscle weakness and difficulty climbing stairs and combing her hair. She never had metabolic crisis, hypoketotic hypoglycemia, or respiratory failure. Laboratory studies showed low serum carnitine, increased serum acylcarnitine levels, and elevated glutaric, ethylmalonic, 2-hydroxylglutaric, 3-methylglutaconic, and lactic acids in urine. Both patients responded well to riboflavin and carnitine treatment. The third patient developed exercise intolerance, dysphagia, poor head control, and limb weakness at age 14 years, and was wheelchair-bound by age 16. He had neck and proximal muscle weakness with wasting, lordosis, winged scapula, and absent tendon reflexes. He did not have metabolic acidosis or hypoketotic hypoglycemia. Pulmonary function tests demonstrated a severe restrictive ventilatory defect. Muscle biopsy showed increased lipid droplets predominantly in type 1 fibers. He also responded well to riboflavin and carnitine treatment. The last patient was a 10-year-old girl who was a slow runner since childhood. She had an upper respiratory tract infection followed by progressive proximal muscle weakness. A few days after discharge from the hospital, her condition rapidly deteriorated and she developed fatal cardiopulmonary failure associated with marked metabolic acidosis, hyperammonemia, and hypoglycemia.
Lan et al. (2010) reported 7 Han Taiwanese patients with genetically confirmed MADD. The patients were identified retrospectively by review of muscle biopsies ascertained for lipid storage myopathy, and all were asymptomatic when recruited. The age at diagnosis ranged from 7 to 43 years, and the patients' ages at the time of the report were between 22 and 44 years. All had a history of episodic myalgia and limb weakness predominantly affecting the proximal muscles during an acute stage of myopathy. Four had dysphagia and 2 had respiratory failure. Serum creatine kinase was increased during the acute attacks. Three had 1 episode, whereas 4 had recurrent episodes. Four patients had extramuscular features, including encephalopathy, seizures, hypoglycemia, and heart failure in 1; vomiting and cardiac arrhythmia in 1; encephalopathy, liver function impairment and lactic acidosis in 1; and vomiting and liver function impairment in 1. All except 1 regained normal muscle strength after the acute stage. Trigger factors in some patients included prolonged fasting and exercise. Blood analysis showed increased acylcarnitines ranging from C8 to C16. Genetic analysis showed that 6 of the patients were homozygous for an A84T mutation in the ETFDH gene (231675.0003), and 1 was compound heterozygous for A84T and R175H (231675.0006). This patient also had a heterozygous substitution in the PNPLA2 gene (609059), which was not thought to contribute to the phenotype.



EYS
**Retinitis pigmentosa 25, 602772 (3), AR**
Collin et al. (2008) examined 6 affected individuals from 3 families with retinitis pigmentosa, all but 1 of whom displayed characteristic RP abnormalities including night blindness as the initial symptom, retinal bone-spicule pigmentation and attenuated retinal vessels, constriction of visual fields, and a nonrecordable ERG or ERG responses in a rod-cone pattern. Two unrelated patients had posterior subcapsular cataracts. The authors observed differences in the photoreceptor dystrophy between the families: in 1 patient from family A, the cones were more severely affected than the rods (cone-rod pattern) and kinetic visual fields were not constricted but showed bilateral central scotomas; fundus examination revealed central abnormalities at the level of the retinal pigment epithelium and moderate attenuation of retinal vessels. Her 60-year-old brother also had central fundus lesions, but his ERG showed neither rod nor cone activity. Family B had relatively late onset of a classic form of RP, with preservation of central vision. The proband in family C, who was the youngest patient in the study, was the only one who was legally blind, due to severely constricted visual fields.



SLC9A3
**Diarrhea 8, secretory sodium, congenital, 616868 (3), AR**
Holmberg and Perheentupa (1985) described a 9-year-old Finnish girl with congenital diarrhea that seemed to be caused by a specific defect in intestinal sodium absorption. The pregnancy was complicated by maternal polyhydramnios, and in the delivery room the patient had a distended abdomen and passed a voluminous watery stool, indicative of intrauterine onset of the diarrhea. Stool analysis showed an abnormally high chloride level, but an even higher sodium concentration. Administration of standard solutions used to treat congenital chloride diarrhea (CCD; see 214700) resulted in metabolic acidosis and vomiting, with an electrolyte status clearly different than that seen in infants with CCD. She improved after treatment with an alkalinizing sodium and potassium citrate solution, and had normal growth and development despite persistent watery diarrhea of more than 1 liter per day that did not cease on fasting. X-rays of the stomach and intestines were normal except for slight dilation of the ileal loops.
Janecke et al. (2015) reported 9 patients from 8 families with secretory sodium diarrhea. There was maternal polyhydramnios in all pregnancies, and all patients had watery secretory diarrhea and prominent abdominal distention after birth due to dilated fluid-filled loops of intestine, indicating that secretory diarrhea had begun prenatally. None of the patients exhibited syndromic features. Inflammatory bowel disease developed in 2 patients, with onset at 4 years of age in 1 patient, resulting in ileocecal resection and temporary ileostomy due to recurrent episodes of small bowel obstruction. The second patient presented at age 16 years with bloody diarrhea and ulceration in the rectum and sigmoid; 1 year later he had nodular lymphoid hyperplasia with ileal granulomas and colonic ulcers, and he passed 3 to 4 watery stools per day without bleeding. Intestinal anatomy, histology, and transit functions were normal in the other patients.
Dimitrov et al. (2019) reported 1-year-old male with a prenatal history of polyhydramnios and dilation of the small intestine seen on ultrasound at 31 weeks' gestation. Digestive enzymes in the amniotic fluid, including gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase, leucine aminopeptidase, lipase, and total alkaline phosphatase, were elevated. He had diarrhea starting on the first day of life and a distended abdomen. He had hyponatremia, low bicarbonate, undetectable urinary sodium, and a fecal sodium of 99 mmol/l. He was treated with sodium and bicarbonate supplementation and oral rehydration. At 6 months of age, he had normal growth and normal neurologic development.
Gupta et al. (2019) reported a 16-month-old girl with a prenatal history of polyhydramnios and dilated bowel loops on ultrasound at 14 weeks' gestation. She had increased stool output starting on the first day of life, and an elevated fecal sodium on laboratory testing. A gastrostomy tube was placed for fluid and electrolyte management. At 16 months of age, the patient had infrequent diarrhea and continued to require electrolyte replacement. Growth was normal.



HPSE2
**Urofacial syndrome 1, 236730 (3), AR**
The urofacial syndrome (UFS) is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by a severe and early-onset form of dysfunctional urinary voiding. Affected individuals usually present prenatally or in early childhood with grossly distorted renal tracts, comprising dysmorphic bladders and dilatation of the ureter and renal pelvis. They are at high risk of vesicoureteral reflux (VUR), with ascending bacterial infection leading to kidney damage, hypertension, and renal failure. One-third of UFS children also experience constipation or fecal soiling, suggesting that the pathophysiology of the syndrome encompasses a broader functional impairment of elimination. In addition, affected individuals have a characteristic facial grimace when trying to smile (summary by Daly et al., 2010).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Urofacial Syndrome
Urofacial syndrome-2 (UFS2; 615112) is caused by mutation in the LRIG2 gene (608869) on chromosome 1p13.
In 3 unrelated families Elejalde (1979) observed 7 children with hydronephrosis, hydroureter and a peculiar facial expression, mainly when smiling or crying. Urethral valves, as well as urethral obstruction, were demonstrated in some. All 3 males had cryptorchidism. One instance of first-cousin parents suggested autosomal recessive inheritance. However, Elejalde (1979) favored autosomal dominant inheritance because the paternal grandfather in that instance was said to have had the same facies and 2 grandsons by another son had the full syndrome and because the proportion of affected sibs was 7 of 13 (closer to 50% than 25%). The last is not a compelling argument. Elejalde (1979) called the disorder the Ochoa syndrome and thanked Dr. Bernardo Ochoa for referring the patients for study. Ochoa and Gorlin (1987) stated that between 1965 and 1986 they saw 36 children with enuresis and urinary tract infection in association with 'inversion' of facial expression when laughing. Mild neuropathic bladder was demonstrated in all cases, with severe urinary tract damage in most. About two-thirds of the patients had moderate to severe constipation. The occurrence of the disorder in multiple sibs with normal parents and increased consanguinity, as well as an equal distribution according to sex, support autosomal recessive inheritance.
Teebi et al. (1989) described a case in a Arab child with consanguineous parents. The patient had early urologic evaluation because he showed the characteristic 'inverted' facial expression, i.e., when smiling or laughing, he appeared to be crying. Investigations at age 6 showed minor changes, indicating the probable importance of detecting the abnormality through the facial expression at an early age.
Garcia-Minaur et al. (2001) described a Spanish boy and 2 Irish sisters with urofacial syndrome. The 12-year-old boy, who was born of consanguineous parents, presented at 3 years of age with a urinary tract infection, and ultrasonography revealed an enlarged left kidney with ureteral, pelvic, and calyceal dilation; voiding cystourethrography showed a trabeculated bladder with narrowing of the urethra and 'massive' left vesicoureteral reflux. Sphincter electromyography at 9 years of age showed severe lack of coordination between detrusor muscle contraction and urethral sphincter relaxation, with significant residual urine after voiding. Other features included a slow growth rate, with height and weight in the 3rd centile, a tendency to constipation, and electrocardiographic changes suggestive of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome (see 194200). He did not have cryptorchidism. His father was reported to have multiple urinary tract infections but urologic investigations were normal and he did not show the characteristic grimace. In the Irish family, 1 sister was the offspring of a twin pregnancy; her twin brother died in the neonatal period of unclear causes. She had constipation and several urinary tract infections in the first years of life, and evaluation at 3 years of age showed unusual facial grimacing and a grossly trabeculated bladder on cystoscopy. Intravenous pyelography (IVP) showed gross dilation of the left collecting system and a nonfunctioning left kidney, with some evidence of right hydronephrosis and hydroureter. She underwent multiple urologic surgeries, and at the time of the report had a reduced glomerular filtration rate (GFR; 40 ml/min) and was maintained on self-catheterization and prophylactic antibiotics. She had normal external ocular movements but bilateral weakness in the distribution of the seventh cranial nerve. Her asymptomatic sister, who had been noted to have similar facial movements, was diagnosed at age 25 years: she had had several urinary tract infections which responded to antibiotic treatment, urea and creatinine serum levels were normal, and IVP showed some clubbing of the upper pole of the right kidney. Cranial nerve examination was normal.
Derbent et al. (2009) studied a 16-year-old Turkish girl, born of first-cousin parents, with recurrent urinary tract infections and persistent enuresis in childhood who at 10 years of age was found to have moderate bilateral hydronephrosis and a trabeculated bladder with urinary retention, and underwent surgery for vesicoureteral reflux. Upon evaluation at 16 years of age, the patient showed the characteristic 'inverted' facial expression of UFS upon attempting to smile, and ultrasonography revealed bilateral hydroureteronephrosis with postvoiding dilation of the renal pelvises and bladder. Her glomerular filtration rate was within normal limits, as were routine biochemistry results, including urea and creatinine levels. Examination and electromyography of facial nerves were normal. Derbent et al. (2009) stated that this was the first UFS case reported from Turkey.
Aydogdu et al. (2010) described 10 Turkish patients from 4 families and 1 sporadic patient with UFS. In 1 family, 2 male cousins were affected, 1 of whom displayed only the characteristic facial grimace when attempting to smile, but had no symptoms of elimination dysfunction and showed normal findings on ultrasound, dimarcaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) scan, uroflowmetry, and videourodynamics. In another family in which 2 male cousins were affected, 1 of them had no facial abnormalities but a history of febrile urinary tract infections since birth with severe incontinence, a low-capacity bladder, and bilateral grade 3 reflux.
Daly et al. (2010) reported 3 British Pakistani sibs with urofacial syndrome, born of unaffected first-cousin parents. The proband presented at 2 years of age in acute renal failure with urinary sepsis and was found to have a hypercontractile bladder, bilateral vesicoureteral reflux, and hydronephrotic scarred kidneys; he underwent a surgical ileal loop urinary diversion procedure. At 11 years of age, he had a low-normal glomerular filtration rate with mild proteinuria, and required treatment for hypertension. At age 6, his sister was found to have dysfunctional voiding with a hypocontractile bladder and VUR; she did not have surgery and her kidney function remained normal. A younger brother presented with renal pelvis dilation on antenatal ultrasound, and postnatally was found to have a low-capacity trabeculated bladder with VUR; he underwent surgical urinary diversion, and at age 10 years he had a low-normal GFR and mild proteinuria but was normotensive. All 3 sibs had the characteristic UFS grimace upon smiling.



DLC1
**Colorectal cancer, somatic, 114500 (3)**
Colorectal cancer is a heterogeneous disease that is common in both men and women. In addition to lifestyle and environmental risk factors, gene defects can contribute to an inherited predisposition to CRC. CRC is caused by changes in different molecular pathogenic pathways, such as chromosomal instability, CpG island methylator phenotype, and microsatellite instability. Chromosome instability is the most common alteration and is present in almost 85% of all cases (review by Schweiger et al., 2013).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Colorectal Cancer
Mutations in a single gene result in a marked predisposition to colorectal cancer in 2 distinct syndromes: familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP; 175100) and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC; see 120435). FAP is caused by mutations in the APC gene (611731), whereas HNPCC is caused by mutations in several genes, including MSH2 (609309), MLH1 (120436), PMS1 (600258), PMS2 (600259), MSH6 (600678), TGFBR2 (190182), and MLH3 (604395). Epigenetic silencing of MSH2 results in a form of HNPCC (see HNPCC8, 613244). Other colorectal cancer syndromes include autosomal recessive adenomatous polyposis (608456), which is caused by mutations in the MUTYH gene (604933), and oligodontia-colorectal cancer syndrome (608615), which is caused by mutations in the AXIN2 gene (604025).
The CHEK2 gene (604373) has been implicated in susceptibility to colorectal cancer in Finnish patients. A germline mutation in the PLA2G2A gene (172411) was identified in a patient with colorectal cancer.
Germline susceptibility loci for colorectal cancer have also been identified. CRCS1 (608812) is conferred by mutation in the GALNT12 gene (610290) on chromosome 9q22; CRCS2 (611469) maps to chromosome 8q24; CRCS3 (612229) is conferred by variation in the SMAD7 gene (602932) on chromosome 18; CRCS4 (601228) is conferred by variation on 15q that causes increased and ectopic expression of the GREM1 gene (603054); CRCS5 (612230) maps to chromosome 10p14; CRCS6 (612231) maps to chromosome 8q23; CRCS7 (612232) maps to chromosome 11q23; CRCS8 (612589) maps to chromosome 14q22; CRCS9 (612590) maps to 16q22; CRCS10 (612591) is conferred by mutation in the POLD1 gene (174761) on chromosome 19q13; CRCS11 (612592) maps to chromosome 20p12; and CRCS12 (615083) is conferred by mutation in the POLE gene (174762) on chromosome 12q24.
Somatic mutations in many different genes, including KRAS (190070), PIK3CA (171834), BRAF (164757), CTNNB1 (116806), FGFR3 (134934), AXIN2 (604025), AKT1 (164730), MCC (159350), MYH11 (160745), PARK2 (602544), RNF43 (612482), and BUB1 (601452) have been identified in colorectal cancer.
Colon cancer is a well-known feature of familial polyposis coli. Cancer of the colon occurred in 7 members of 4 successive generations of the family reported by Kluge (1964), leading him to suggest a simple genetic basis for colonic cancer independent of polyposis. The combination of colonic and endometrial cancer has been observed in many families (e.g., Williams, 1978).
Sivak et al. (1981) studied a kindred with the familial cancer syndrome in which every confirmed affected member had at least 1 primary carcinoma of the colon. The average age at which cancer appeared was 38 years. Multiple primary neoplasms occurred in 23% of cancer patients.
Budd and Fink (1981) reported a family with a high frequency of mucoid colonic carcinoma. Since endometrial carcinoma, atypical endometrial hyperplasia, uterine leiomyosarcoma, bladder transitional carcinoma, and renal cell carcinoma also occurred in the family, this may be the same disorder as the Lynch cancer family syndrome type II (120435).
Bamezai et al. (1984) reported an Indian Sikh kindred in which 8 persons suffered from cancer of the cecum, not associated with polyposis.
Burt et al. (1985) studied a large Utah kindred called to attention because of occurrence of colorectal cancer in a brother, a sister, and a nephew. No clear inheritance pattern was discernible until systematic screening was undertaken for colonic polyps using flexible proctosigmoidoscopy. One or more adenomatous polyps were found in 41 of 191 family members (21%) and 12 of 132 controls (9%)--p less than 0.005. Pedigree analysis showed best fit with autosomal dominant inheritance. Cannon-Albright et al. (1988) extended the studies with investigations of 33 additional kindreds. The kindreds were selected through either a single person with an adenomatous polyp or a cluster of relatives with colonic cancer. The kindreds all had common colorectal cancers, not the rare inherited condition of familial polyposis coli or nonpolyposis inherited colorectal cancer. Likelihood analysis strongly supported dominant inheritance of a susceptibility to colorectal adenomas and cancers, with a gene frequency of 19%. According to the most likely genetic model, adenomatous polyps and colorectal cancers occur only in genetically susceptible persons; however, the 95% confidence interval for this proportion was 53 to 100%.
Ponz de Leon et al. (1992) analyzed data on 605 families of probands with colorectal cancer in the province of Modena in Italy. Among the 577 presumed nonpolyposis cases, both parents had colorectal cancer in 11, one parent in 130, and neither parent in 436. Segregation was compatible with dominant transmission of susceptibility to cancer.
Mecklin (1987) investigated the frequency of hereditary colorectal cancer among all colorectal cancer patients diagnosed in 1 Finnish county during the 1970s. The cancer family syndrome type of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma emerged as the most common verifiable risk factor, involving between 3.8 and 5.5% of all colorectal cancer patients. The frequencies of familial adenomatosis and ulcerative colitis were 0.2% and 0.6%, respectively. The observed frequency is probably an underestimate. The patients with cancer family syndrome were young, accounting for 29 to 39% of the patients under 50 years of age, and their tumors were located predominantly (65%) in the right hemicolon.



PDE6B
**Night blindness, congenital stationary, autosomal dominant 2, 163500 (3), AD**
Rambusch (1909) described a large Danish kindred with autosomal dominant congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB). The ancestor of the family was a farmer born about 1660 in northern Jutland. At the time of the report by Rosenberg et al. (1991), the pedigree comprised more than 200 affected persons in 11 generations. Gal et al. (1994) summarized the findings. Autosomal dominant inheritance was substantiated by several instances of male-to-male transmission. Penetrance was complete. Expression of the mutant allele seemed to be uniform; affected members complained of lack of night vision for as long as they could remember. Ophthalmoscopy revealed no signs of retinitis pigmentosa (see 268000). Dark adaptation curves were monophasic, due to the absence of the rod phase, with final thresholds elevated approximately by a factor of 10(3). Day vision was normal in all patients. Rod responses following full-field single-flash stimulation with a dim blue light were absent, while mixed cone-rod responses to white suprathreshold stimuli were strongly attenuated. The residual b-wave had a shape and temporal characteristics of a cone response with superimposed oscillatory potentials. The a-wave amplitude was reduced to 30 to 50% of the lower normal limit, while implicit time was normal. Cone responses to 32-Hz flickering white light were normal. Both electrophysiologic and psychophysical findings in affected family members were identical to those reported in patients from the Nougaret family (see 610444), in whom mutations in the GNAT1 gene (139330) were found.
Tsang et al. (2007) reported a 36-year-old man with a long history of CSNB and myopia. ERG showed generalized retinal dysfunction affecting the rod system and a locus of dysfunction at the rod-bipolar interface. There was little change in 10 years and no evidence of photoreceptor cell death. There was a family history of the disorder; genetic analysis identified a mutation in the PDE6B gene (H258N; 180072.0005).
**Retinitis pigmentosa-40, 613801 (3), AR**
McLaughlin et al. (1993) identified 6 patients from 3 families with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and mutations in the PDE6B gene. All affected individuals had clinical findings typical of RP. They reported absent night vision from early childhood. Ophthalmoscopy revealed attenuated retinal vessels and typical intraretinal bone spicule pigment around the midperiphery.
Among 19 Spanish families with autosomal recessive RP, Bayes et al. (1995) identified 1 carrying a homozygous mutation in PDE6B (RP40). The proband was a 39-year-old man who reported absence of night vision since childhood. Ophthalmoscopy revealed a pale retina, attenuated retinal vessels, and typical intraretinal bone spicule pigment in the midperiphery and around the periphery. There was no detectable rod or cone response on ERG.
Hmani-Aifa et al. (2009) studied a consanguineous Tunisian family in which autosomal recessive RP cosegregated with Usher syndrome (USH2C; 605472). The family had been originally reported by Hmani et al. (1999).



RHCE
**Rh-null disease, amorph type, 617970 (3)**
The RH-null phenotype designates rare individuals whose red blood cells lack all Rh antigens. Two RH-null types, the regulator type (268150) and the amorph type, arising from independent genetic mechanisms have been distinguished. The regulator type is caused by mutation in the RHAG gene (180297). The amorph type arises from mutations at the RH locus itself that silence Rh expression. The RH locus contains the RHD (111680) and RHCE genes tandemly arranged at chromosome 1p36-p34. Four genes must therefore be silenced to produce the RH-null phenotype. The absence of the D antigen, produced by the RHD gene, is common in the human population; the D-negative phenotype may result from deletion or genetic alteration of the RHD gene. The RH-null amorph phenotype thus arises from inactivating mutations in RHCE on a D-negative background (summary by Huang et al., 1998, Huang et al., 2000).
Clinically, Rh-null patients present mild to moderate hemolytic anemia; cells exhibit characteristic morphologic and functional abnormalities including spherocytosis, stomatocytosis, and diminished lifespan. Rh-null patients rarely develop antibodies without stimulation, and most cases occur in response to pregnancy or transfusion (Silvy et al., 2015).
Seidl et al. (1972) reported 2 German sibs from a consanguineous family in whom Rh determination revealed complete lack of all Rh antigens. In the female sib, hemolytic anemia was detected during hospitalization for bronchopneumonia; a splenectomy was performed because of suspicion of a hereditary spherocytosis. Both she and her male sib reported several periods of jaundice which they attributed to stress situations (e.g., appendectomy, university graduation, business problems). These patients were later analyzed molecularly by Huang et al. (1998) and Cherif-Zahar et al. (1998).
In a survey of 42 examples of the Rh-null phenotype, Nash and Shojania (1987) found that only 5 were of the amorph type.
Perez-Perez et al. (1992) described a Spanish family in which a silent Rh gene was segregating, giving rise to the amorph type of Rh-null in the proposita whose parents were first cousins. She suffered from severe hemolytic anemia. Western blot analysis carried out with glycosylation-independent antibodies directed against the Rh polypeptide and the LW glycoprotein, respectively, confirmed that these protein components were absent from the red cells of the proposita.
Silvy et al. (2015) studied a 32-year-old pregnant woman from Libya with moderate hemolytic anemia and a history of 5 pregnancies with varying degrees of hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn (HDFN). The fourth pregnancy resulted in stillbirth and the fifth fetus died in utero at 32 weeks' gestation despite a normal ultrasound at 30 weeks. Rh phenotyping revealed that her red blood cells lacked all common Rh antigens.



ITPR2
**?Anhidrosis, isolated, with normal sweat glands, 106190 (3), AR**
Isolated anhidrosis with normal sweat glands (ANHD) is characterized by absence of perspiration and subsequent heat intolerance with normal morphology and number of sweat glands. Teeth, hair, nails, and skin are normal (Klar et al., 2014).
Dann et al. (1990) reported the case of a young man with generalized anhidrosis rendering him heat intolerant. His reaction to muscarinic stimulation of sweat glands was 10% of normal. On biopsy, the sweat glands were morphologically intact and cardiovascular autonomic responses were normal. The patient's mother reported reduced sweating and her response to muscarinic stimulation was 50% of normal, but the father and 2 sisters sweated normally. A postganglionic defect was postulated. The sketchy information on the family is consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance but also with X-linked inheritance since the deficiency in the mother appears to have been less severe than that in the son. Ingber (1990) suggested that the disorder described by Dann et al. (1990) be named Dann-Epstein-Sohar syndrome.
Klar et al. (2014) described a consanguineous Pakistani family in which 5 members had anhidrosis and severe heat intolerance, confirmed by starch-iodine sweat test. Body growth, teeth, hair, nails, and skin were normal. Affected family members did not report dry mouth, reduced saliva production, or malabsorption. Biochemical analysis of serum and urine in 2 affected individuals showed electrolyte levels within normal ranges; S-amylase levels were also normal. Skin biopsy from the forearm of 1 affected family member showed normal morphology and a normal number of eccrine sweat glands.
Classification
Ingber (1990) commented that there are 3 types of generalized anhidrosis: (1) ectodermal dysplasia with generalized anhidrosis, and hair, sweat gland and dental anomalies with or without additional congenital defects (see 305100); (2) ectodermal dysplasia with generalized anhidrosis, with no other defects but with morphologic and functional abnormalities of sweat glands (see 206600); and (3) ectodermal dysplasia with generalized anhidrosis, with no other defects and with no morphologic sweat gland anomalies.



BCR
**Leukemia, acute lymphocytic, somatic, 613065 (3)**
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), also known as acute lymphocytic leukemia, is a subtype of acute leukemia, a cancer of the white blood cells. Somatically acquired mutations in several genes have been identified in ALL lymphoblasts, cells in the early stages of differentiation. Germline variation in certain genes may also predispose to susceptibility to ALL (Trevino et al., 2009).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
A susceptibility locus for acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL1) has been mapped to chromosome 10q21. See also ALL2 (613067), which has been mapped to chromosome 7p12.2; and ALL3 (615545), which is caused by mutation in the PAX5 gene (167414) on chromosome 9p.
**Leukemia, chronic myeloid, somatic, 608232 (3)**
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a clonal myeloproliferative disorder of a pluripotent stem cell with a specific cytogenetic abnormality, the Philadelphia chromosome (Ph), involving myeloid, erythroid, megakaryocytic, B lymphoid, and sometimes T lymphoid cells, but not marrow fibroblasts. Silver (2003) reviewed the hematologic and clinical aspects of chronic myeloid leukemia. Geary (2000) presented a historical review of CML.
CML has a biphase or triphase clinical course (Medina et al., 2003). Approximately 90% of patients are diagnosed in the chronic phase, but the disease eventually evolves to a blastic phase unless successfully treated. Approximately two-thirds of patients manifest an accelerated phase. A distinct feature of disease progression is the appearance of additional cytogenetic abnormalities in the Ph-positive cells. This phenomenon, known as clonal evolution, frequently involves a second Ph, trisomy of chromosome 8, and isochromosome 17 and other abnormalities of chromosome 17 (Kantarjian et al., 1988), although other abnormalities have been described. Clonal evolution is considered a criterion of accelerated phase, although when it represents the only criterion of transformation, it is associated with a better prognosis than other criteria of accelerated phase (Cortes et al., 2003).
Sawyers (1999) reviewed the clinical aspects of chronic myeloid leukemia.



LMF1
**Lipase deficiency, combined, 246650 (3), AR**
Auwerx et al. (1990) described a large family with familial hepatic triglyceride lipase (HTGL; 151670) deficiency and a coexisting reduced lipoprotein lipase (LPL; 609708) similar to the heterozygous state of LPL deficiency. The proband was detected because of hypertriglyceridemia and chylomicronemia. Analysis of genomic DNA from these subjects by restriction enzyme digestion showed no major abnormalities in the structure of either the HTGL gene or the LPL gene. The authors incorrectly referred to 'compound heterozygotes for HTGL and LPL deficiency'; they should have referred to these individuals as 'double heterozygotes,' because the genes represent separate loci on separate chromosomes (chromosome 15 and chromosome 8, respectively).
The hypertriglyceridemia in the cld mouse (see Animal Model) is characterized by severe chylomicronemia that is caused by deficiency of lipoprotein lipase and exacerbated by partial deficiency of hepatic triglyceride lipase (HTGL; 151670). The mutation, however, affects neither the LPL nor the HTGL gene, but a transmembrane protein designated Lmf1 by Peterfy et al. (2007). To investigate the potential role of the LMF1 gene in human disease, Peterfy et al. (2007) screened 11 individuals with hypertriglyceridemia and decreased lipase activity for mutations. They identified a 48-year-old woman carrying an LMF1 mutation in homozygosity in whom severe hypertriglyceridemia was first noted at age 18 years. She had her first attack of pancreatitis at age 27, and had had at least 15 subsequent attacks. She began to develop lipodystrophy at age 44 that progressed to complete involvement of limbs and buttocks, sparing her face and abdomen. Also at age 44, type 2 diabetes was diagnosed, which was controlled with metformin. Bilateral large tuberous xanthomas on elbows, knees, and feet were present. Even in compliance with strict dietary fat restrictions, triglyceride concentration was 7 times the average of 31 control subjects at the lowest measurement, and increased markedly to over 70 times the control value when diet was not regulated. The severe hypertriglyceridemia was found to be due to LPL deficiency, as determined by a 93% decrease in LPL activity in the plasma of the affected individual. In addition, hepatic lipase activity was decreased by half, confirming the status of combined lipase deficiency.
Cefalu et al. (2009) screened 22 individuals with severe hypertriglyceridemia and identified 1 with a homozygous mutation in the LMF1 gene. The proband was a 42-year-old Tunisian man living in Sicily, Italy. His parents were apparently unrelated. His mother died at age 62 years of a respiratory disease; the 65-year-old father and his 7 sibs were all healthy. Severe hypertriglyceridemia was first noted at age 32 years when the patient had an episode of acute pancreatitis. A diet restriction to 15% of fat intake (less than 7% of saturated fat) and treatment with fibrates and omega-3 fatty acids were prescribed, but compliance was poor, and the patient had a second episode of pancreatitis at age 38 years. He was overweight, with a BMI of 29. Triglycerides were 2,400 mg/dL, total cholesterol was 374 mg/dL, and HDL cholesterol levels were 44 mg/dL. He had a third episode of acute pancreatitis at age 41 years and then developed type 2 diabetes.



SMAD1
**Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, type 2D, 601472 (3), AD**
Ionasescu et al. (1996) reported results of clinical, electrophysiologic, and genetic linkage studies on a large pedigree with autosomal dominant Charcot-Marie-Tooth axonal neuropathy type 2, which they designated CMT2D. The pedigree consisted of 38 members, 14 of which were affected. Onset of the disease was between 16 and 30 years of age with weakness of the hands. Affected members had severe weakness and atrophy of the hands and mild to moderate weakness of the feet. Deep tendon reflexes were absent in the upper extremities and decreased in the lower extremities. There was distal hypesthesia for touch, proprioception, and vibration sense. Variable pes cavus and hammertoes were present in all patients. Mild to moderate balance impairment was present in 5 patients with a positive Romberg sign. Gowers and Trendelenburg signs were present in 2 patients. Scoliosis was present in 4 patients. The disease had a mild progressive course in 12 patients. No nerve enlargement, no tremors, no paralysis of the vocal cord or diaphragm, and no abnormalities of cranial nerve function were detected. Motor nerve conduction velocities showed normal values with normal latencies. Electromyographs revealed signs of denervation with large motor unit potentials, fibrillation potentials, and positive sharp waves. Ionasescu et al. (1996) reported that the absence of palpably enlarged nerves distinguished this pedigree from cases of CMT1. The clinical picture in this pedigree was different from other axonal CMT2 types in that weakness and atrophy were more severe in the hands than in the feet, and that sensory impairment had the same prevalence as the motor involvement.
Sambuughin et al. (1998) reported a family in which autosomal dominant CMT2D and a form of distal spinal muscular atrophy (DSMAVA; 600794) segregated in the same kindred. All 17 affected members had bilateral weakness and wasting in thenar and first dorsal interossei muscles starting commonly with cold-induced cramps in the hands in their late teens. The mean age at onset was 18 years (range 12 to 36) and progression of illness was very slow. DSMAV was diagnosed in 11 patients based on the presence of hand and peroneal muscle weakness and atrophy without sensory deficits. CMT2D was diagnosed in 6 other patients based on the presence of weakness and atrophy in the same muscle groups, hypoactive knee and ankle reflexes, stocking and glove distribution sensory loss, and reduced sensory nerve action potential amplitudes.
Yalcouye et al. (2019) reported 2 Malian sibs, aged 19 and 35 years, with CMT2D. Symptoms in both started at 12 years of age with upper extremity muscle weakness and progressed to involve the thenar and interosseous muscles and then the lower extremities. On examination, both sibs had distal muscle weakness and atrophy with sensory loss, which was more pronounced in the upper than the lower extremities. They both had decreased or absent reflexes and a steppage gait. The older sib had clawhands. Both sibs had recurrent seizures beginning at approximately 12 years of age, and an EEG showed slow frontal temporal waves in the older sib. Nerve conduction studies revealed no response in any nerves tested, including the left peroneal, sural, median and tibial nerves.
**Neuropathy, distal hereditary motor, type VA, 600794 (3), AD**
Meadows and Marsden (1969) reported 3 sibs with a form of distal muscular atrophy confined largely to the upper extremities. All had weakness of the hands since early childhood, manifest by difficulty writing. The condition worsened significantly much later in life, in the sixth and seventh decades. Hand weakness and atrophy were apparent in all, and 2 sibs had lower limb weakness with hyporeflexia/areflexia; the remaining sib had hyporeflexia/areflexia without lower limb weakness. EMG and muscle biopsy confirmed a neurogenic disorder. The mode of inheritance was unclear.
Christodoulou et al. (1995) identified a large 5-generation Bulgarian family from Burgass with an autosomal dominant distal spinal muscular atrophy (dSMA) with upper limb predominance. Afflicted members had weakness and wasting which was more prominent in the upper limbs and more selectively involved the thenar muscles and the first dorsal interossei. They had clinical information on 114 family members, of whom 30 were affected. The disease commenced with hand involvement at a mean age of 17 years (median 16 years). In 40% of patients, symptoms subsequently developed in their feet within about 2 years. In 1 branch of the family, mild pyramidal features and, rarely, up-going plantar responses were observed. There were not sensory symptoms or signs except for slightly reduced vibratory sense in the feet in 10% of the patients. Progression of the disease was very slow, with patients still ambulant at the age of 64. Electrophysiologic investigations showed reduced or, in severely wasted muscles, unobtainable compound motor action potentials. Motor conduction velocities and distal latencies were normal, except in severely wasted muscles, where the former were reduced. Christodoulou et al. (1995) concluded that the family fell into the type V category of distal spinal muscular atrophy according to Harding (1993), who proposed a classification into 7 types of distal SMA according to their clinical and genetic features. The family was similar to the one reported by Lander et al. (1976), but differed in that weakness and wasting were more severe in the thenar muscles and first dorsal interossei. The family was considered to be different from the families with Silver syndrome described by Silver (1966) and by van Gent et al. (1985) in that most of their patients also had brisk reflexes and signs of spasticity in addition to hand weakness.
Sambuughin et al. (1998) reported a family in which autosomal dominant CMT2D and distal spinal muscular atrophy type V segregated in the same kindred. All 17 affected members had bilateral weakness and wasting in thenar and first dorsal interossei muscles starting commonly with cold-induced cramps in the hands in their late teens. The mean age at onset was 18 years (range 12 to 36) and progression of illness was very slow. DSMAV was diagnosed in 11 patients based on the presence of hand and peroneal muscle weakness and atrophy without sensory deficits. CMT2D was diagnosed in 6 other patients based on the presence of weakness and atrophy in the same muscle groups, hypoactive knee and ankle reflexes, stocking and glove distribution sensory loss, and reduced sensory nerve action potential amplitudes.
Antonellis et al. (2003) reported an Algerian Sephardic Jewish family with autosomal dominant DSMAV. A father and daughter had bilateral hand amyotrophy and weakness, particularly in the thenar and dorsal interosseus muscles. Motor and sensory nerve conduction velocities were normal.
Van de Warrenburg et al. (2006) reported 2 unrelated Dutch families with overlapping Silver syndrome and distal motor neuropathy caused by the same BSCL2 mutation (N88S; 606158.0013). The first family contained 5 affected individuals spanning 3 generations. All presented with pes cavus and foot of leg muscle weakness and atrophy between 11 and 26 years of age. There was slow progression, with gradually evolving lower limb hypertonia and hyperreflexia with extensor plantar responses without prominent spasticity. Two patients also developed weakness and atrophy of the first dorsal interosseus and abductor pollicis brevis muscles without involvement of the hypothenar muscles. In the second family, there were multiple affected individuals spanning 3 generations. Age at onset was before age 20 years. About half of the patients presented with foot or leg muscle weakness and atrophy, whereas the other half presented with hand muscle weakness and atrophy. Most developed hyperreflexia with extensor plantar responses; spasticity was observed in older patients. Van de Warrenburg et al. (2006) emphasized the phenotypic variability and incomplete penetrance of some symptoms.
Brusse et al. (2009) reported 12 members of a large 3-generation Dutch family with phenotypic overlap between Silver syndrome and distal HMN5 who carried a heterozygous N88S mutation in the BSCL2 gene. The phenotype was variable, and the distribution of muscle weakness and atrophy included predominantly the feet (in 4), the hands (in 1), or both upper and lower extremities (in 4). Three individuals showed evidence of pyramidal features, including spasticity, hyperreflexia, and extensor plantar responses. Severity of the disease ranged from adolescent patients with disabling muscle weakness to an elderly patient with only mild weakness of the ankle dorsiflexors and bilateral pes cavus. Brusse et al. (2009) noted the extreme phenotypic variability associated with the N88S mutation in their family and in those reported by Auer-Grumbach et al. (2005) and van de Warrenburg et al. (2006), who also carried the N88S mutation, and suggested the presence of other genetic or environmental factors. In their family, Brusse et al. (2009) used genomewide linkage analysis to identify a candidate disease modifier on chromosome 16p13.3-p13.12 that was shared by all 12 affected individuals (maximum lod score of 3.28). One family member without the N88S mutation but with the chromosome 16p haplotype showed mild electrophysiologic abnormalities. Brusse et al. (2009) postulated that a locus on chromosome 16p may contain a disease modifier in their family.



CFHR3
**{Hemolytic uremic syndrome, atypical, susceptibility to}, 235400 (3), AR, AD**
Typical hemolytic uremic syndrome is characterized by acute renal failure, thrombocytopenia, and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia associated with distorted erythrocytes ('burr cells'). The vast majority of cases (90%) are sporadic, occur in children under 3 years of age, and are associated with epidemics of diarrhea caused by verotoxin-producing E. coli. The death rate is very low, about 30% of cases have renal sequelae, and there is usually no relapse of the disease. This form of HUS usually presents with a diarrhea prodrome (thus referred to as D+HUS) and has a good prognosis in most cases. In contrast, a subgroup of patients with HUS have an atypical presentation (aHUS or D-HUS) without a prodrome of enterocolitis and diarrhea and have a much poorer prognosis, with a tendency to relapse and frequent development of end-stage renal failure or death. These cases tend to be familial. Both autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant inheritance have been reported (Goodship et al., 1997; Taylor, 2001; Veyradier et al., 2003; Noris et al., 2003). Noris and Remuzzi (2009) provided a detailed review of atypical HUS.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome
Atypical HUS is a genetically heterogeneous condition. Susceptibility to the development of the disorder can be conferred by mutations in various components of or regulatory factors in the complement cascade system (Jozsi et al., 2008). See AHUS2 (612922), AHUS3 (612923), AHUS4 (612924), AHUS5 (612925), and AHUS6 (612926). AHUS7 (see 615008) is caused by mutation in the DGKE gene (601440), which is not part of the complement cascade system.
Hagge et al. (1967) reported the hemolytic uremic syndrome in 2 sibs. Features included intravascular hemolysis, thrombocytopenia, and azotemia. One had repeated attacks ending in renal failure and death at age 8 years; the other recovered completely after one attack. Chan et al. (1969) reported HUS in 2 adopted, unrelated sibs.
Kaplan et al. (1975) reported HUS in 3 sibs and reviewed reports of 21 sibships with 2 or more affected individuals. Two groups of families could be identified among 41 analyzed. Sibs whose onset was within a short time of each other had a relatively good prognosis (19% mortality). Those whose onset was more than a year apart had a poorer prognosis (68% mortality). Kaplan et al. (1975) suggested that an environmental agent was causative in the first group and that genetic factors were important in the second. Most of the first group of families came from an endemic area, whereas most of the second group came from a nonendemic area.
Blattler et al. (1975) studied a family in which 4 sibs had died from HUS. The parents and 4 surviving sibs had normal renal function and normal platelet and fibrinogen survival. The mother and 3 sibs had an increased percentage of megathrombocytes. Two of them showed renal accumulation of Cr 51-platelet radioactivity and ultrastructural changes of the endothelium on renal biopsy.
Edelsten and Tuck (1978) reported a family with HUS inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
Thompson and Winterborn (1981) reported an 8-month-old Asian boy with very low levels of plasma factor H who presented with the hemolytic uremic syndrome. Complement component C3 (120700) was also depleted. A healthy 3-year-old brother had the same complement profile, suggesting activation of the alternative complement pathway. The parents, who were first cousins, had half-normal levels of factor H.
Kirchner et al. (1982) described this disorder in mother and daughter. The daughter's illness, characterized primarily by renal insufficiency, was most compatible with adult hemolytic uremic syndrome and the mother's illness, with prominent neurologic findings, was most compatible with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Merrill et al. (1985) reported 2 certain cases and 3 possible case in 2 generations of a North Carolina black family.
Neuhaus et al. (1997) reported clinical features of atypical D-HUS in 23 children. Features included requirement for dialysis (74%), hypertension (43%), cardiomyopathy (43%), and cerebral convulsions (48%). Only 5 patients (26%), including 4 infants, recovered completely. Six patients (32%) had 1 to 10 recurrences and 8 (42%) developed end-stage renal failure. Four children died.
Warwicker et al. (1998) reported a 36-year-old man with sporadic relapsing aHUS. He had anemia, thrombocytopenia, hypertension, and acute renal failure. Renal biopsy showed a thrombotic microangiopathy and deposition of complement component C3 in vessel walls. He had half-normal serum levels of factor H and decreased levels of C3, consistent with activation of the alternative complement pathway. HUS recurred after renal transplantation. Molecular analysis revealed a heterozygous 4-bp deletion in the CFH gene (134370.0011).
Ohali et al. (1998) reported a large consanguineous Bedouin family in which 10 infants had atypical HUS characterized by microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, acute renal failure, severe hypertension, edema, and increased serum triglycerides. All had very early onset with a median presentation at age 2 weeks. Two patients died during the first disease episode; the remaining 8 patients had a mean number of 4 relapses despite treatment. In total, 8 patients died at ages 3 weeks to 10 months. Factor H levels were low to undetectable in all 4 patients studied, and C3 levels were decreased in 9 of 10 infants tested. Four kidney biopsies showed marked arteriolar changes, including stenosis, edema, and thickening of the intima. Glomerular changes included swelling of endothelial cells with microvillus transformation and proliferation of mesangial cells with increased matrix deposition in the mesangium. Other changes included fibrotic changes in glomeruli and the tubulointerstitium, as well as C3 deposition in capillary walls.
Rougier et al. (1998) reported 6 children with complement factor H deficiency and acute glomerular disease. Five of the 6 children presented with hemolytic uremic syndrome. Two of the children were from a consanguineous family from Turkey and exhibited a homozygous deficiency characterized by absence of the 150-kD form of factor H.
Noris et al. (2003) reported a 21-year-old woman and her affected brother. Disease onset in the sister (the proband) was at age 16 months, when she developed fever, hemolytic anemia, and thrombocytopenia. At the time, renal function was normal. Thereafter she had 6 recurrences of thrombotic microangiopathy, all associated with deteriorating renal function. Treatment consisted of plasma exchange and infusions, steroids, and blood transfusions, which led to complete recovery of blood abnormalities and renal function. The last episode occurred at age 20 years and was characterized by anemia, thrombocytopenia, and severe impairment of renal function. Renal biopsy showed irreversible changes of chronic nephropathy with typical features of HUS, including diffuse narrowing/occlusion of vessels and severe glomerular ischemia. At the age of 21 years she was on chronic dialysis. The proband's brother had 2 episodes of HUS at age 9 years. Both were characterized by severe hemolytic anemia and acute renal insufficiency and resolved without plasma treatment, with no renal sequelae.
**{Macular degeneration, age-related, reduced risk of}, 603075 (3), AD**
Age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is a progressive degeneration of photoreceptors and underlying retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells in the macula region of the retina. It is a highly prevalent disease and a major cause of blindness in the Western world. Drusen, pale excrescences of variable size, and other deposits accumulate below the RPE on the Bruch membrane; clinical and histopathologic investigations have shown that these extracellular deposits are the hallmark of early ARMD. As ARMD advances, areas of geographic atrophy of the RPE can cause visual loss, or choroidal neovascularization can occur to cause wet, or exudative, ARMD with accompanying central visual loss (summary by De et al., 2007).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Age-Related Macular Degeneration
ARMD2 (153800) is associated with mutation in the ABCR gene (601691) on chromosome 1p, and ARMD3 (608895) is caused by mutation in the FBLN5 gene (604580) on chromosome 14q31. Up to 50% of the attributable risk of age-related macular degeneration (ARMD4; 610698) appears to be explained by a polymorphism in the CFH gene (134370.0008). ARMD5 (613761) and ARMD6 (613757) are associated with mutation in the ERCC6 (609413) and RAX2 (610362) genes, respectively. ARMD7 (610149) and ARMD8 (613778), which both represent susceptibility linked to chromosome 10q26, are associated with single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the HTRA1 (602194) and ARMS2 (611313) genes, respectively. ARMD9 (611378) is associated with single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the C3 gene (120700). ARMD10 (611488) maps to chromosome 9q32 and may be associated with a polymorphism in the TLR4 gene (603030). ARMD11 (611953) is association with variation in the CST3 gene (604312); ARMD12 (613784) with variation in the CX3CR1 gene (601470); and ARMD13 (615439) with variation in the CFI gene (217030). ARMD14 (615489) is associated with variation in or near the C2 (613927) and CFB (138470) genes on chromosome 6p21. ARMD15 (615591) is associated with variation in the C9 gene (120940). There is evidence for a form of ARMD caused by mutation in the mitochondrial gene MTTL1 (590050).
A haplotype carrying deletion of the complement factor H-related genes CFHR1 (134371) and CFHR3 (605336) is also associated with reduced risk of ARMD.
Lotery and Trump (2007) reviewed the molecular biology of age-related macular degeneration and tabulated the genes associated with ARMD, including those with only positive findings versus genes for which conflicting results have been found.
Age-related macular degeneration is the most common cause of acquired visual impairment in the elderly and is estimated to affect at least 11 million individuals in the United States. U.S. studies showed that mild forms of ARMD occur in nearly 30% of those 75 years and older, and advanced forms occur in about 7% of people in this age group. Allikmets et al. (1997) noted that ARMD is divided clinically into 2 subtypes: 80% of patients have 'dry' ARMD, the hallmarks of which include 1 or more of the following: the presence of cellular debris (drusen) in or under the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), irregularities in the pigmentation of the RPE, or geographic atrophy (GA). Twenty percent of patients have exudative or 'wet' ARMD characterized by serous detachment of the RPE or choroidal neovascularization (CNV), or both. Severe vision loss is associated most often with geographic atrophy or exudative disease.
Streiff and Babel (1963) described senile macular changes in an 80-year-old mother and her 50-year-old daughter. Because of the late onset of the abnormality, dominant inheritance is more likely, and affected members of successive generations are not likely to be observed. Braley (1966) stated that senile macular degeneration runs in families: 'Nearly every patient I have seen has had other members of the family similarly affected.' Visual disturbance without ophthalmoscopic findings may be present by age 50 and fundus changes become apparent only after age 70. Meyers and Zachary (1988) described a family in which 6 of 13 children had age-related macular degeneration; 2 of the affected sibs were identical twins in whom monozygosity was established (with 99.4% likelihood) by genetic tests.
Postel et al. (2005) compared the phenotype between 411 singleton and 125 multiplex probands with ARMD and found the clinical appearance and distribution of ARMD grades to be similar. There was no statistically significant difference in grade distribution between the 2 groups. Postel et al. (2005) concluded that singleton and multiplex ARMD data could be combined for consolidated genetic analyses.
Bok (2002) stated there was widespread agreement among ophthalmologists that numerous large drusen, when present in both eyes, represent a significant risk factor for the evolution of early ARMD into more advanced ARMD, with loss of central vision.
In a population-based cohort study, Klein et al. (2003) examined the relationship of 2 diseases associated with systemic inflammatory response, emphysema and gout, and selected markers of systemic inflammation with the 10-year incidence of age-related maculopathy. They found a modest relationship between both increased white blood cell count and emphysema and the increased 10-year incidence of lesions defining early and late age-related maculopathy.
Phipps et al. (2003) found that cone adaptational kinetics were affected early in age-related maculopathy, while the visual acuity was still good.
Retinal angiomatous proliferation (RAP) is a neovascularization that begins in the retina and extends through the subretinal space, eventually communicating with choroidal neovascularization. It occurs in 10 to 15% of neovascular ARMD cases (Ghazi, 2002). It has a poor natural history and shows resistance to treatment with conventional laser photocoagulation (Yannuzzi et al., 2001).
Scholl et al. (2004) reported close agreement between the grading of stereoscopic color slides and digitized nonstereoscopic images. Digitized nonstereoscopic color images of the macula proved to be useful for grading age-related maculopathy (ARM) and ARMD.
In a review of epidemiologic data regarding the natural history of ARMD and its risk factors, Klein et al. (2004) found that large soft drusen associated with pigmentary abnormalities increased the risk of progression to advanced ARMD. Large soft drusen might fade over time. Advanced ARMD was more likely to be present in whites than in blacks, despite the similar prevalence of soft drusen in both groups. Neovascular ARMD was more frequent than geographic atrophy in most population-based studies in whites in America, Australia, and the Netherlands than in similar population-based studies in Iceland and Norway. After age and family history, there were few consistent relationships of risk factors to ARMD. Of these, the relationships of smoking, hypertension, and cataract surgery to advanced ARMD had been the most consistent.
Maruko et al. (2007) studied the clinical characteristics of 189 consecutive Japanese patients newly diagnosed with neovascular ARMD at one hospital and found that their features differed from those reported in white patients. In Japanese patients, there was a preponderance of polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV), male gender, unilaterality, and absence of drusen in the second eye, with the exception of RAP.
In a review on the association of cigarette smoking and ARMD, Thornton et al. (2005) found that the estimate of risk was about 2- to 3-fold higher in current smokers when compared with never smokers in 13 studies. They concluded that cigarette smoking is an important risk factor for ARMD.
Chakravarthy et al. (2007) examined the association between cigarette smoking and ARMD in 158 cases of ARMD (109 neovascular and 49 GA) in a European population. Current smokers had increased odds of neovascular ARMD or geographic atrophy, whereas for ex-smokers the odds were less. Compared with people with unilateral ARMD, those with bilateral ARMD were more likely to have a history of heavy smoking in the previous 25 years. The attributable fraction for ARMD due to smoking was 27%. Chakravarthy et al. (2007) concluded that their findings highlighted the need for increasing public awareness of the risks associated with smoking.
In a longitudinal study using the Blue Mountains Eye Study cohort in Australia, Tan et al. (2007) assessed the relationship between cardiovascular disease and cardiovascular risk factors, other than smoking, and risk of long-term incident ARMD. Increasing high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol was inversely related to incident late ARMD. Elevated total-HDL cholesterol ratio predicted late ARMD and geographic atrophy (GA). Diabetes predicted incident GA, but not neovascular ARMD. History of stroke predicted incident early ARMD and incident indistinct soft or reticular drusen. Neither pulse pressure, systolic or diastolic blood pressure reading, nor presence of hypertension at baseline was associated with incident ARMD. Tan et al. (2007) stated that their findings provided evidence of links between cardiovascular risk factors and ARMD but that further prospective evaluation of these relationships was warranted.
In a longitudinal study using the Blue Mountains Eye Study cohort, Tan et al. (2007) found that, after controlling for age, gender, and other confounding factors, statin users, compared with nonusers, had a reduced risk of developing indistinct soft drusen, the principal late ARMD precursor lesion.
Nolan et al. (2007) identified a relative lack of macular pigment as an independent risk factor for ARMD.
Pang et al. (2015) examined 230 eyes of 150 consecutive patients with neovascular AMD and 40 human donor eyes with a histopathologic diagnosis of neovascular AMD for layered, hyperreflective, subretinal pigment epithelium (sub-RPE) lines, known as the onion sign. Sixteen (7%) of the 230 eyes and 2 (5%) of the 40 donor eyes had onion signs on spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT). In all 16 eyes, the onion sign persisted in follow-up for up to 5 years, with fluctuations in the abundance of lines and association with intraretinal hyperreflective foci. Histologic analysis of the 2 donor eyes revealed that the hyperreflective lines correlated with clefts created by extraction of cholesterol crystals during tissue processing.
Joachim et al. (2015) reported the incidence and progression of ARMD over 15 years, beginning with 3,654 participants aged 49 years or older, and ending with 1,149 of the remaining participants, in the Blue Mountains Eye Study. The 15-year incidence was 22.7% for early ARMD and 6.8% for late ARMD; after adjusting for competing risks, early and late ARMD incidence was 15.1% and 4.1%, respectively. Women had a higher incidence of any ARMD compared with men. Risk of progression to late ARMD was strongly associated with severity of early ARMD lesions.
ARMD1
In a family studied by Klein et al. (1998), 10 members with ARMD showed the presence of large, soft, confluent drusen (see 126700) accompanied by varying degrees of RPE degeneration and/or geographic atrophy. Age at diagnosis of ARMD ranged from 54 to 77 years (average, 65 years). In the 8 affected patients with visual symptoms, onset was between age 52 and 75 years (average, 67 years). The clinical picture was described as 'a predominantly dry phenotype.'
Pras et al. (2015) studied a 3-generation Tunisian Jewish family in which 5 elderly sibs had advanced ARMD. All were first diagnosed in the seventh decade of life, and all experienced progression to severe vision impairment within 10 years. Funduscopy and optical coherence tomography showed a variety of pathology, including macular hemorrhage, large hard drusen, massive depigmentation and geographic atrophy of the RPE, and choroidal neovascularization with resultant juxtafoveal scarring. Fluorescein angiography displayed early hyperfluorescence due to the simultaneous occurrence of many large foci of 'window defect' RPE atrophy as well as 'starry sky' staining of basal laminar drusen extending peripherally. Of 9 asymptomatic offspring in the next generation of the family, 7 had normal macular appearance whereas 2 sisters, aged 39 and 48 years, exhibited altered foveal reflexes with hypopigmentation.



PROZ
**[Protein Z deficiency], 614024 (3)**
Protein Z serves as a cofactor for the downregulation of coagulation by forming a complex with the protein Z-dependent protease inhibitor (ZPI; 605271). Evidence also suggests that protein Z may promote the assembly of thrombin with phospholipid surfaces, thus enhancing coagulation. There is a wide variation of protein Z levels in human plasma, and studies have reported conflicting results of the clinical consequences of protein Z deficiency in humans. Most studies have reported an association between decreased protein Z levels and thrombosis, including stroke, venous thrombosis, and obstetric complications, although early reports suggested an association between protein Z deficiency and bleeding tendency (Kemkes-Matthes and Matthes, 1995). Overall, a role for protein Z in the pathogenesis of hemostatic disorders in humans is controversial and remains unclear (review by Broze, 2001 and Vasse, 2008).
Protein Z deficiency has been shown to exacerbate the thrombotic phenotype in patients with thrombophilia due to factor V Leiden (see 188055).
Reports of Bleeding Tendency
Kemkes-Matthes and Matthes (1995) examined 36 patients with bleeding tendency of unknown origin who were not under oral anticoagulant treatment and had normal liver synthesis function. The mean protein Z levels of patients with bleeding tendency was significantly diminished (52%) in comparison with the healthy control group. In 21 of the patients, they found lower protein Z levels than in the lowest protein Z level of the control group. Kemkes-Matthes and Matthes (1995) concluded that protein Z deficiency is a new type of bleeding tendency that cannot be detected by routine coagulation tests and could be the cause for the 'capillary fragility syndrome.' The latter disorder is characterized by positive Rumpel Leed tests and normal routine coagulation tests. At the time of this study, protein Z was believed to associate with and help localize thrombin at the phospholipid surface at sites of injury. However, it was later found that the main role of protein Z is to inhibit the coagulation cascade prior to the formation of the prothrombinase complex (Vasse, 2008).
In contrast to the study of Kemkes-Matthes and Matthes (1995), Gamba et al. (1998) found no difference in plasma levels of protein Z between healthy controls and 15 adult patients with mild to moderate bleeding tendencies of unknown origin. These authors concluded that protein Z deficiency did not play a pathogenetic role in the bleeding tendency of their patients, and noted that the clinical impact of protein Z on hemostasis remained obscure.
Ravi et al. (1998) found a wide range of protein Z levels in healthy men and women, although women tended to have lower levels. None of 48 patients with a suspected bleeding disorder had a protein Z level below the normal range, but protein Z levels were significantly lower in the group of male patients with a bleeding history as compared to healthy men. The data indicated that low-normal protein Z levels are not associated with a bleeding tendency. However, the study did not rule out the possibility that a low protein Z level may be a weak cofactor associated with an increased bleeding tendency, and did not indicate whether decreased or absent protein Z may result in a hemorrhagic diathesis.
Reports of Increased Thrombosis
Vasse et al. (2001) analyzed plasma protein Z levels in 56 patients with deep venous thrombosis (DVT), 169 patients with ischemic stroke, and 88 controls. There was no significant difference in mean protein Z concentrations between the deep venous thrombosis group and the controls, and 5% of individuals in both groups had protein Z deficiency. In patients with ischemic stroke, however, protein Z levels were lower than the normal range, and 33 of these patients (20%) had protein Z deficiency.
In a study of 450 women with unexplained fetal loss and 200 controls, Gris et al. (2002) found an association between decreased plasma protein Z levels and early fetal demise (odds ratio (OR) of 6.7, p less than 0.003). Gris et al. (2002) postulated that protein Z deficiency may induce an enhanced risk of severe placental insufficiency soon after the connection of maternal and fetal circulations.
Santacroce et al. (2006) found similar protein Z levels in 197 patients with deep vein thrombosis and healthy controls. However, the incidence of protein Z levels below the 5.0 or 2.5% ranges was higher in patients (10.2% and 8.7%, respectively) than in controls (4.1 and 2.0%, respectively), yielding an odds ratio of 2.7 and 4.6, respectively, for the risk of DVT in individuals with low protein Z levels. The authors concluded that very low levels of protein Z may be associated with an increased risk of DVT.
In a metaanalysis involving 28 case-control studies including 4,218 patients with thrombotic diseases and 4,778 controls, Sofi et al. (2010) found that low protein Z levels were associated with an increased risk of thrombosis (OR of 2.90, p less than 0.00001). By subgroup analysis, significant associations were found between low protein Z levels and arterial vascular diseases (OR of 2.67, p = 0.0002), pregnancy complications (OR of 4.17, p less than 0.00001), and venous thromboembolic diseases (OR of 2.18, p = 0.01). These results were consistent with a role for protein Z deficiency in various thrombotic diseases, including arterial thrombosis, pregnancy complications, and venous thromboembolism.



CCL3L1
**{HIV/AIDS, susceptibility to}, 609423 (3)**
The pathogenesis of HIV infection and the progression from infection to AIDS vary significantly between exposed individuals. Infection occurs after the virus, which has macrophage (M)- and T lymphocyte (T)-tropic strains and more than 12 subtypes, survives an array of nonspecific, nongenetic environmental and host factors.



KIR3DS1
**{AIDS, delayed/rapid progression to}, 609423 (3)**
The pathogenesis of HIV infection and the progression from infection to AIDS vary significantly between exposed individuals. Infection occurs after the virus, which has macrophage (M)- and T lymphocyte (T)-tropic strains and more than 12 subtypes, survives an array of nonspecific, nongenetic environmental and host factors.



TXNRD2
**?Glucocorticoid deficiency 5, 617825 (3), AR**
Familial glucocorticoid deficiency-5 is characterized by resistance to adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and isolated glucocorticoid deficiency, with typical biochemical findings of low serum cortisol levels and high plasma ACTH. Patients commonly present with hyperpigmentation (Prasad et al., 2014).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of familial glucocorticoid deficiency, see GCCD1 (202200).
Prasad et al. (2014) reported a large consanguineous Kashmiri family in which 7 members had isolated glucocorticoid deficiency. The index patient was diagnosed at age 10.8 years, after hyperpigmentation occurred during febrile illnesses. Laboratory evaluation revealed low serum cortisol with elevated plasma ACTH, consistent with ACTH resistance. Her sister was subsequently diagnosed at age 4.5 years, with a 2-year history of hyperpigmentation. The proband had 4 children, 3 of whom were screened at birth and diagnosed with glucocorticoid deficiency between the ages of 1 month and 7 years, including 1 girl whose ACTH level was initially elevated but normalized for a time before she was diagnosed at age 6.9 years. The fourth child had elevated ACTH levels in infancy but later showed normalization and was clinically well at age 7.4 years. The proband's sister had a son who presented at age 1 month with cardiac failure due to truncus arteriosus and ventricular septal defect. During that hospitalization he was also diagnosed with isolated glucocorticoid deficiency. All affected individuals demonstrated a poor cortisol response to ACTH stimulation, requiring glucocorticoid replacement therapy, and all had normal mineralocorticoid production.





BCKDHB
**Maple syrup urine disease, type Ib, 248600 (3), AR**
The major clinical features of maple syrup urine disease are mental and physical retardation, feeding problems, and a maple syrup odor to the urine. The keto acids of the branched-chain amino acids are present in the urine, resulting from a block in oxidative decarboxylation. There are 5 clinical subtypes of MSUD: the 'classic' neonatal severe form, an 'intermediate' form, an 'intermittent' form, a 'thiamine-responsive' form, and an 'E3-deficient with lactic acidosis' form (246900). All of these subtypes can be caused by mutations in any of the 4 genes mentioned above, except for the E3-deficient form, which is caused only by mutation in the E3 gene (Chuang and Shih, 2001).
Classic Severe MSUD
Menkes et al. (1954) reported a familial syndrome in which 4 sibs had progressive infantile cerebral dysfunction associated with an unusual urinary substance. Onset was in the first week of life, with death by 3 months of age. The urine had an odor resembling maple syrup. Referring to the syndrome as 'maple syrup urine disease,' Westall et al. (1957) found that the levels of branched-chain amino acids, leucine, isoleucine, and valine, were greatly elevated. Menkes (1959) isolated and identified the corresponding keto acids in the urine of affected patients, suggesting that the catabolic pathways of the branched-chain amino acids were blocked at the decarboxylation step. Dancis et al. (1960) also referred to the disorder as 'branched-chain ketoaciduria.'
In classic MSUD, which is the most common form of the disorder, 50% or more of the keto acids are derived from leucine, and the activity of the BCKD complex is less than 2% of normal. Affected newborns appear normal at birth, with symptoms developing between 4 and 7 days of age. The infants show lethargy, weight loss, metabolic derangement, and progressive neurologic signs of altering hypotonia and hypertonia, reflecting a severe encephalopathy. Seizures and coma usually occur, followed by death if untreated (Chuang and Shih, 2001).
Wong et al. (1972) reported a case of classic MSUD. DiGeorge et al. (1982) made important observations on the course of classic MSUD in the first 4 days of life when an affected child was on a diet devoid of branched-chain amino acids. Although the branched-chain amino acids were normal in cord blood, serum leucine was significantly elevated by 4 to 14 hours of age and rose progressively thereafter, permitting an accurate and early diagnosis. However, Shih (1984) emphasized that classic MSUD may be missed in newborn screening because of slow rise of blood leucine levels.
Frezal et al. (1985) observed a family in which 2 different forms of MSUD occurred in the same family. The proposita had an acute neonatal form; 2 of her sisters had an almost asymptomatic form which the authors thought represented compound heterozygosity for the classic mutant and a partial variant. The proband did not respond to thiamine.
Kaplan et al. (1989) described psychometric testing on 9 girls and 7 boys with MSUD. They concluded that prospective or early treatment significantly improves the intellectual outcome and that poor biochemical control may adversely affect performance.
Van Calcar et al. (1992) described a 25-year-old woman with classic MSUD who was diagnosed at the age of 11 days and was successfully treated with dietary restrictions. She was followed closely during a pregnancy, with delivery of a healthy baby whose length and weight were at the 5th centile.
Intermediate MSUD
Schulman et al. (1970) first described intermediate MSUD in a 19-month-old patient who was being evaluated for mental retardation. She had normal physical growth but severe developmental delay. She had mild systemic acidosis and markedly increased levels of plasma branched-chain amino acids and urinary branched-chain keto acids. Protein restriction was effective, but thiamine administration was not. The patient had 15 to 25% residual BCKD activity in leukocytes and fibroblasts. Kalyanaraman et al. (1972) reported 2 patients with the intermediate form of MSUD manifesting as hyperkinetic behavior and mental retardation.
Chhabria et al. (1979) reported a neonate who presented with ophthalmoplegia and was later found to have intermediate MSUD with residual BCKD complex activity. They noted that 2 similar cases with MSUD and ophthalmoplegia had previously been reported.
Gonzalez-Rios et al. (1985) reported a boy with intermediate MSUD who presented at age 10 months in ketoacidotic coma, with a history of irritability, poor feeding, and growth and developmental delay. branched chain amino acid restriction resulted in normal growth and development by age 42 months, but thiamine was not effective. The authors determined that the defect was in the catalytic activity of the E1 component of the BCKD complex, but there was some residual enzyme activity.
Schadewaldt et al. (2001) determined whole-body L-leucine oxidation in MSUD patients. In 4 patients with classic MSUD, L-leucine oxidation was too low to be measurable. In 2 females with a severe variant form of the disease, L-leucine oxidation was about 4% of control. In 6 milder variants, including intermediates, the estimates for residual whole-body L-leucine oxidation ranged from 19 to 86% (59 +/- 24%) of control, and were substantially higher than the residual branched-chain 2-oxo acid dehydrogenase complex activities in the patients' fibroblasts (10 to 25% of control).
Intermittent MSUD
Morris et al. (1961) reported a 24-month-old female with intermittent MSUD. She was asymptomatic until age 16 months when she had recurrent episodic ataxia, lethargy, semicoma, and elevated urinary branched-chain keto acids following otitis media. Similarly, her younger brother was normal until about age 10 months when he had an acute episode. Dietary protein restriction was effective (see also Morris et al., 1966).
In 2 sibs of each of 2 families, Dancis et al. (1967) observed intermittent MSUD. The children suffered from a transient neurologic disorder associated with elevation of branched-chain amino acids and keto acids in the urine as well as a distinctive odor to the urine. One sib of each family died during an attack. Late onset of symptoms and clinical normality between attacks differentiated the condition from classic MSUD. In addition, the level of leukocyte BCKD complex activity seemed to be higher than in the classic form of the disease.
Two Norwegian families with the intermittent form were described by Goedde et al. (1970). They noted that in the intermittent form, only 1 parent shows decreased enzyme activity. Van der Horst and Wadman (1971) described an intermittent form with severe episodes of acidosis with mental retardation that was partially reversed on dietary therapy. Other cases of intermittent MSUD were reported by Kiil and Rokkones (1964), Valman et al. (1973), and Indo et al. (1988).
Thiamine-responsive MSUD
Scriver et al. (1971) described a variant of MSUD in which the hyperaminoacidemia was completely corrected by thiamine hydrochloride (10 mg per day) with dietary restriction (see also Scriver et al., 1985). Duran et al. (1978) and Duran and Wadman (1985) reported successful treatment of MSUD with thiamine administration.
Chuang et al. (1982) found that BCKDH complex activity in thiamine-responsive MSUD is about 30 to 40% the normal rate. Further studies showed that the primary defect in thiamine-responsive MSUD is reduced affinity of the mutant BCKD for thiamine pyrophosphate.
In 2 cases of MSUD responsive to thiamine administration, Zhang et al. (1990) found that the sequence of the gene for the E1-alpha subunit was normal. The result was considered consistent with any of the following possibilities: that the thiamine-binding site involves the E1-beta subunit, that the binding site is on E1-alpha, but a mutation elsewhere in the complex alters the affinity of the thiamine-binding site by an allosteric interaction, or that the clinical response to thiamine is due to stabilization of the enzyme that has a mutation in either the E1-beta or the E2 protein.
Fenugreek Tea
In a report from Tunisia, Monastiri et al. (1997) noted that since maple syrup is largely unknown by Mediterranean populations, the odor of the urine in MSUD is more reminiscent of fenugreek (Trigonella foenum graecum L.) than of maple syrup. Fenugreek beans are traditionally used by Mediterranean populations as an infusion for sick persons (Boukef et al., 1982), and its fragrant smell is disagreeable and well known in that area. Monastiri et al. (1997) suggested that physicians in Mediterranean countries should keep in mind that a fenugreek odor of urine with neurologic distress in newborn infants, without a history of fenugreek ingestion by the mother of the baby, should raise a suspicion of MSUD.
Sewell et al. (1999) described a case of 'pseudo-maple syrup urine disease' caused by drinking fenugreek tea. The 5-week-old Egyptian infant had a 10-minute episode of unconsciousness while drinking bottled tea. He recovered spontaneously, but the parents nevertheless sought medical attention. On examination, the child was found to exude an aroma similar to that of Maggi (a widely available flavoring), and a spontaneously voided urine sample had a similar aroma. The parents indicated that the child had been given herbal tea (Helba tea) to reduce flatulence and prevent fever. This tea contains seeds of fenugreek. Analysis of the infant's urine revealed the presence of sotolone, the compound responsible for the aroma in maple syrup urine disease (Podebrad et al., 1999). Tea prepared from fenugreek seeds was found to contain sotolone. Bartley et al. (1981) had reported a similar case. Since herbal teas are popular as home remedies, particularly in Middle Eastern countries, physicians should use caution when they are presented with young infants from such countries, to avoid unnecessary and costly investigations.



SMG9
**Heart and brain malformation syndrome, 616920 (3), AR**
Heart and brain malformation syndrome is a severe autosomal recessive multiple congenital anomaly syndrome characterized by profoundly delayed psychomotor development, dysmorphic facial features, microphthalmia, cardiac malformations, mainly septal defects, and brain malformations, including Dandy-Walker malformation (summary by Shaheen et al., 2016).
Shaheen et al. (2016) reported 2 unrelated consanguineous families of Arab origin in which 5 patients had a severe multiple congenital anomaly syndrome. In the first family, the proband was a female infant who died at age 7 weeks. Antenatal ultrasound showed polyhydramnios, splaying of the cerebellum, and a ventricular septal defect. At birth, she showed craniofacial abnormalities, including prominent forehead and occiput, wide anterior fontanel, low-set malformed ears, depressed nasal bridge with anteverted nares, microphthalmia, and high-arched palate. She also had clenched hands with camptodactyly. Brain imaging showed Dandy-Walker malformation, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, and hypoplastic corpus callosum. Cardiac abnormalities included interrupted aortic arch, hypoplastic valves, and ventricular septal defect. She developed seizures and sepsis, resulting in death. Family history revealed that the mother had a history of 3 abortions, and there were 2 older sibs with multiple congenital anomalies who died in utero or in the first year of life. In a second family, 2 children, aged 2 and 3 years, had poor overall growth, dysmorphic features, microcephaly (up to -6 SD), profoundly delayed psychomotor development with hypotonia and hyperreflexia, poor vision, and cardiac ventricular septal defects. Brain imaging in both patients showed brain atrophy; 1 patient had Dandy-Walker malformation and decreased myelination, whereas the other had a thin corpus callosum. Dysmorphic features were detailed in 1 patient, who showed narrow forehead, prominent metopic suture, widow's peak, hypertelorism, posteriorly rotated ears, broad nasal bridge, full and everted lower lip, cleft lip, and small eyes. Laboratory studies were unremarkable.



CFH
**Basal laminar drusen, 126700 (3), AD**
Drusen are extracellular deposits that accumulate below the retinal pigment epithelium on Bruch membrane. They appear as slightly raised, yellow subretinal nodules randomly scattered in the macula. 'Drusen' is the plural for 'Druse,' German for 'nodule' or 'crystal' (summary by Bok, 2002, Boon et al., 2008).
'Basal laminar drusen' refers to an early adult-onset drusen phenotype that shows a pattern of uniform small (25- to 75-micrometer), slightly raised yellow subretinal nodules randomly scattered in the macula (Boon et al., 2008). The term 'basal laminar drusen' is widely used but may be a misnomer because these deposits do not appear to correspond with nodular or diffuse thickening of the Bruch membrane. In later stages, these drusen often become more numerous, with clustered groups of drusen scattered throughout the retina. On fluorescein angiography, a typical 'stars in the sky' appearance may be observed. In time these small basal laminar drusen may expand and ultimately lead to a serous pigment epithelial detachment of the macula that may result in vision loss.
Deutman and Jansen (1970) described a family in which 8 persons in 5 sibships had confirmed multiple drusen of Bruch membrane. There was no instance of male-to-male transmission but an affected male had 2 daughters who were negative by examination. They observed concordant monozygotic twins and affected boys 12 and 14 years old. They concluded that the family with 'crystalline retinal degeneration' reported by Evans (1950) had this condition. The authors also concluded that Doyne honeycomb choroiditis (126600) is the same condition. Round or oval lesions in almost grape-like clusters are concentrated in the posterior polar region. Pigmentary disturbances with secondary calcifications occur. The macula is almost always involved and may appear edematous or hemorrhagic. Loss of vision occurs during the progressive stages. This is considered a form of fleck retina disease (see 228980).
Bok (2002) stated that there was widespread agreement among ophthalmologists that numerous large drusen, when present in both eyes, represent a significant risk factor for the evolution of early age-related macular dystrophy (ARMD1; 603075) into more advanced ARMD, with loss of central vision.
**Complement factor H deficiency, 609814 (3), AR, AD**
Complement factor H deficiency (CFHD) can manifest as several different phenotypes, including asymptomatic, recurrent bacterial infections, and renal failure. Laboratory features usually include decreased serum levels of factor H, complement component C3 (120700), and a decrease in other alternative pathway components, indicating activation of the alternative complement pathway. Homozygotes and heterozygotes may show increased susceptibility to meningococcal infections. In addition, a number of renal diseases have been associated with factor H defect or deficiency, including atypical hemolytic-uremic syndrome (aHUS; 235400), membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis type II (MPGN II), and nonspecific hematuria or nephritis (Ault, 2000). See also complement factor I deficiency (610984), which shows phenotypic overlap with this disorder.
Welch (2002) discussed the role of complement in renal disease.
Membranoproliferative Glomerulonephritis type II
Abrera-Abeleda et al. (2006) summarized features of MPGN relevant to the complement cascade. MPGN type II, also known as dense deposit disease, causes chronic renal dysfunction that progresses to end-stage renal disease in about half of patients within 10 years of diagnosis. MPGN types I and III are variants of immune complex-mediated disease; MPGN II, in contrast, has no known association with immune complexes (Appel et al., 2005). MPGN II accounts for less than 20% of cases of MPGN in children and only a fractional percentage of cases in adults. Both sexes are affected equally, with the diagnosis usually made in children between the ages of 5 and 15 years who present with nonspecific findings such as hematuria, proteinuria, acute nephritic syndrome, or nephrotic syndrome. More than 80% of patients with MPGN II are positive for serum C3 nephritic factor (C3NeF), an autoantibody directed against C3bBb, the convertase of the alternative pathway of the complement cascade. C3NeF prolongs the half-life of C3 convertase. Patients with MPGN type II without C3NeF often have mutations in the CFH gene, which also results in prolonged activation of C3 convertase.
Wyatt et al. (1982) reported 2 families with partial factor H deficiency and glomerulonephritis. In 1 family, of Polish origin, a teenaged male had vasculitis, thrombocytopenia, proteinuria, and depressed levels of serum factor H and complement component C3. The mother, maternal uncle, and a cousin had depressed H levels. The second family was of English-Irish extraction living in Kentucky; 3 persons in 3 generations had H levels about half normal. The index case had depressed serum factors H and B levels and IgA nephropathy (161950) which progressed to renal failure. A sister also had IgA nephropathy and depressed serum H and C3 levels.
Levy et al. (1986) reported a consanguineous Algerian family in which 2 brothers had early-onset glomerulonephritis with C3 deposits and low levels (less than 10% of normal) of complement factor H. The factor H deficiency was defined by undetectable complement hemolytic activity by the classic (CH50) and alternate (AP50) pathways, and low levels of C3 and factor B (138470). The unaffected first-cousin parents and 2 healthy sibs, presumed heterozygotes, had half-normal H values. Renal disease was discovered at 14 and 4 months of age in the elder and younger brother, respectively. The elder had recurrent episodes of macroscopic hematuria occurring during the course of infections but did not seem to have an excessive number of infections; the younger had repeated upper and lower respiratory tract infections and nearly persistent macroscopic hematuria. Electron microscopy of renal biopsies from both patients were typical for intramembranous dense deposit disease, but immunofluorescence microscopy showed an atypical pattern with abundant granular C3 deposits within the mesangium and along the capillary walls.
Lopez-Larrea et al. (1987) studied a family in which 3 female sibs had undetectable levels of factor H and C3 nephritic factor, low levels of factor B, C3, and C5 (see 120500), and normal levels of C4-binding protein (120830), factor I (217030), and classic pathway factors. C4 (see 120810) levels were low in 1 patient. Two of the sibs had Neisseria meningitidis sepsis; all 3 developed membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis.
Brai et al. (1988) and Misiano et al. (1993) described a consanguineous Italian family in which 3 sibs had deficiency of factor H and its spliced isoform FHL1. The proband had systemic lupus erythematosus (152700) with chronic renal failure and had highly reduced C3 serum levels and low concentrations of C5-C9. She had suffered from skin lesions (chronic discoid plaques on sun-exposed areas), with ulcerations and central nervous system involvement with psychosis. Her 2 affected brothers showed a similar serum complement profile. They had suffered from 3 and 1 episodes, respectively, of meningococcal meningitis, without autoimmune disease. Factor H was undetectable in all affected sibs, and both parents presented serum concentrations of factor H that were about 50% of normal. Western blot analysis showed the absence of both factor H and FHL1 in the affected sibs. The father and 2 of the H-deficient sibs, including the proband, also had a partial C2 deficiency (217000).
Nielsen et al. (1989) described a 15-year-old girl with a complete deficiency of factor H. Both parents had half normal levels. The girl had 2 episodes of meningococcal disease. The degree of H reduction was sufficient to cause increased, spontaneous activation of the alternative complement pathway.
Fijen et al. (1996) described a Dutch family in which both heterozygous and homozygous factor H deficiency was observed. The proband of the family suffered from subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus and had had meningococcal meningitis. Western blot analysis showed complete factor H deficiency. Among 21 relatives of the proband encompassing 3 generations, 10 had low factor H levels, including 2 children of the proband, indicating heterozygosity. Serum studies showed decreased levels of components of the alternative complement pathway.
Vogt et al. (1995) reported a 6-year-old Native American (Sioux) boy who presented at age 13 months with hypocomplementemic hypertensive renal disease. Renal biopsy showed changes consistent with membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, deposition of type III collagen (120180), and segmental complement C3 deposition in capillary loops. Decreased levels of serum C3 and factor B but normal levels of serum C4 and factor I were found; factor H was undetectable by radial immunodiffusion analysis. Slightly depressed levels of factor H were present in both parents; his sibs had normal levels. Ault et al. (1997) reported that the child originally described by Vogt et al. (1995) underwent renal transplantation at age 7; serum C3 concentrations remained low thereafter, as did factor H levels. Western blot analysis of the patient's plasma before and after renal transplantation showed slightly increased concentration of the 45-kD factor H and no detectable 150-kD factor H when compared with 7 normal plasma samples. Ault et al. (1997) demonstrated that the patient's fibroblasts retained 155-kD factor H protein, which was not degraded even after 12 hours, and showed that factor H was retained in the endoplasmic reticulum.
Licht et al. (2006) reported 2 girls, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, with early onset of membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis type II. Renal biopsies showed thickening of the glomerular basement membrane caused by dense deposits in the lamina densa. Immunohistochemistry showed deposition of C3. Laboratory analysis showed activation of both the alternative and classical complement pathway, and both patients and their asymptomatic mother also had autoantibodies to C3 nephritic factor (C3Nef). Genetic analysis identified a homozygous mutation in the CFH gene (134370.0014) in the patients; both parents were heterozygous for the mutation.
Servais et al. (2007) described a unique form of glomerulonephritis characterized by isolated mesangial C3 deposits without dense intramembranous deposits or mesangial proliferation, which the authors termed 'glomerulonephritis C3.' Heterozygous mutations in complement regulatory genes were identified in 4 of 6 unrelated patients with glomerulonephritis C3, including 2 patients each with mutations in the CFH (see, e.g., 134370.0017) and CFI genes (see, e.g., 217030.0007), respectively. In addition, 1 of 13 unrelated patients with glomerulonephritis with MPGN also had a heterozygous CFH mutation. The findings indicated that dysregulation of the complement alternative pathway is associated with a wide spectrum of diseases ranging from HUS to MPGN with C3 deposits.
**{Hemolytic uremic syndrome, atypical, susceptibility to, 1}, 235400 (3), AR, AD**
Typical hemolytic uremic syndrome is characterized by acute renal failure, thrombocytopenia, and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia associated with distorted erythrocytes ('burr cells'). The vast majority of cases (90%) are sporadic, occur in children under 3 years of age, and are associated with epidemics of diarrhea caused by verotoxin-producing E. coli. The death rate is very low, about 30% of cases have renal sequelae, and there is usually no relapse of the disease. This form of HUS usually presents with a diarrhea prodrome (thus referred to as D+HUS) and has a good prognosis in most cases. In contrast, a subgroup of patients with HUS have an atypical presentation (aHUS or D-HUS) without a prodrome of enterocolitis and diarrhea and have a much poorer prognosis, with a tendency to relapse and frequent development of end-stage renal failure or death. These cases tend to be familial. Both autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant inheritance have been reported (Goodship et al., 1997; Taylor, 2001; Veyradier et al., 2003; Noris et al., 2003). Noris and Remuzzi (2009) provided a detailed review of atypical HUS.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome
Atypical HUS is a genetically heterogeneous condition. Susceptibility to the development of the disorder can be conferred by mutations in various components of or regulatory factors in the complement cascade system (Jozsi et al., 2008). See AHUS2 (612922), AHUS3 (612923), AHUS4 (612924), AHUS5 (612925), and AHUS6 (612926). AHUS7 (see 615008) is caused by mutation in the DGKE gene (601440), which is not part of the complement cascade system.
Hagge et al. (1967) reported the hemolytic uremic syndrome in 2 sibs. Features included intravascular hemolysis, thrombocytopenia, and azotemia. One had repeated attacks ending in renal failure and death at age 8 years; the other recovered completely after one attack. Chan et al. (1969) reported HUS in 2 adopted, unrelated sibs.
Kaplan et al. (1975) reported HUS in 3 sibs and reviewed reports of 21 sibships with 2 or more affected individuals. Two groups of families could be identified among 41 analyzed. Sibs whose onset was within a short time of each other had a relatively good prognosis (19% mortality). Those whose onset was more than a year apart had a poorer prognosis (68% mortality). Kaplan et al. (1975) suggested that an environmental agent was causative in the first group and that genetic factors were important in the second. Most of the first group of families came from an endemic area, whereas most of the second group came from a nonendemic area.
Blattler et al. (1975) studied a family in which 4 sibs had died from HUS. The parents and 4 surviving sibs had normal renal function and normal platelet and fibrinogen survival. The mother and 3 sibs had an increased percentage of megathrombocytes. Two of them showed renal accumulation of Cr 51-platelet radioactivity and ultrastructural changes of the endothelium on renal biopsy.
Edelsten and Tuck (1978) reported a family with HUS inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
Thompson and Winterborn (1981) reported an 8-month-old Asian boy with very low levels of plasma factor H who presented with the hemolytic uremic syndrome. Complement component C3 (120700) was also depleted. A healthy 3-year-old brother had the same complement profile, suggesting activation of the alternative complement pathway. The parents, who were first cousins, had half-normal levels of factor H.
Kirchner et al. (1982) described this disorder in mother and daughter. The daughter's illness, characterized primarily by renal insufficiency, was most compatible with adult hemolytic uremic syndrome and the mother's illness, with prominent neurologic findings, was most compatible with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Merrill et al. (1985) reported 2 certain cases and 3 possible case in 2 generations of a North Carolina black family.
Neuhaus et al. (1997) reported clinical features of atypical D-HUS in 23 children. Features included requirement for dialysis (74%), hypertension (43%), cardiomyopathy (43%), and cerebral convulsions (48%). Only 5 patients (26%), including 4 infants, recovered completely. Six patients (32%) had 1 to 10 recurrences and 8 (42%) developed end-stage renal failure. Four children died.
Warwicker et al. (1998) reported a 36-year-old man with sporadic relapsing aHUS. He had anemia, thrombocytopenia, hypertension, and acute renal failure. Renal biopsy showed a thrombotic microangiopathy and deposition of complement component C3 in vessel walls. He had half-normal serum levels of factor H and decreased levels of C3, consistent with activation of the alternative complement pathway. HUS recurred after renal transplantation. Molecular analysis revealed a heterozygous 4-bp deletion in the CFH gene (134370.0011).
Ohali et al. (1998) reported a large consanguineous Bedouin family in which 10 infants had atypical HUS characterized by microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, acute renal failure, severe hypertension, edema, and increased serum triglycerides. All had very early onset with a median presentation at age 2 weeks. Two patients died during the first disease episode; the remaining 8 patients had a mean number of 4 relapses despite treatment. In total, 8 patients died at ages 3 weeks to 10 months. Factor H levels were low to undetectable in all 4 patients studied, and C3 levels were decreased in 9 of 10 infants tested. Four kidney biopsies showed marked arteriolar changes, including stenosis, edema, and thickening of the intima. Glomerular changes included swelling of endothelial cells with microvillus transformation and proliferation of mesangial cells with increased matrix deposition in the mesangium. Other changes included fibrotic changes in glomeruli and the tubulointerstitium, as well as C3 deposition in capillary walls.
Rougier et al. (1998) reported 6 children with complement factor H deficiency and acute glomerular disease. Five of the 6 children presented with hemolytic uremic syndrome. Two of the children were from a consanguineous family from Turkey and exhibited a homozygous deficiency characterized by absence of the 150-kD form of factor H.
Noris et al. (2003) reported a 21-year-old woman and her affected brother. Disease onset in the sister (the proband) was at age 16 months, when she developed fever, hemolytic anemia, and thrombocytopenia. At the time, renal function was normal. Thereafter she had 6 recurrences of thrombotic microangiopathy, all associated with deteriorating renal function. Treatment consisted of plasma exchange and infusions, steroids, and blood transfusions, which led to complete recovery of blood abnormalities and renal function. The last episode occurred at age 20 years and was characterized by anemia, thrombocytopenia, and severe impairment of renal function. Renal biopsy showed irreversible changes of chronic nephropathy with typical features of HUS, including diffuse narrowing/occlusion of vessels and severe glomerular ischemia. At the age of 21 years she was on chronic dialysis. The proband's brother had 2 episodes of HUS at age 9 years. Both were characterized by severe hemolytic anemia and acute renal insufficiency and resolved without plasma treatment, with no renal sequelae.
**{Macular degeneration, age-related, 4}, 610698 (3)**



CACNA1F
**Aland Island eye disease, 300600 (3), X-linked**
Aland Island eye disease (AIED) is an X-linked recessive retinal disease characterized by fundus hypopigmentation, decreased visual acuity, nystagmus, astigmatism, protan color vision defect (303900), progressive myopia, and defective dark adaptation. Although AIED has been referred to as a form of albinism, there is no misrouting of the optic nerves, which excludes it from the formal diagnosis of classic albinism (King et al., 2001).
Forsius and Eriksson (1964) reported X-linked tapetoretinal degeneration in a family described in a family from the Aland Islands in the Sea of Bothnia. Males in 6 generations were affected with hypopigmentation of the fundus, foveal hypoplasia, marked impairment of vision, nystagmus, myopia, astigmatism, and protan colorblindness. Female carriers showed slight disturbances of color discrimination and electromyographically demonstrable nystagmus. Warburg (1964) described ocular albinism and protanopia in the same Aland Island kindred family. Only 2 of 4 males with ocular albinism showed dyschromatopsia. The absence of characteristic fundus pigmentary pattern in female carriers in the family of Forsius and Eriksson suggested that they had a distinct entity from X-linked Nettleship-Falls ocular albinism (OA1; 300500). Scialfa (1967) reported another family with this disorder.
By electron microscopic study of skin biopsies obtained by Forsius in the Island of Aland, O'Donnell and Green (1978) and O'Donnell et al. (1980) concluded that the Forsius-Eriksson type is morphologically distinct from the Nettleship-Falls type of ocular albinism; no macromelanosomes were present.
By electrophysiologic studies, van Dorp et al. (1985) showed that there is no misrouting of the optic pathways in Aland Eye disease, thus distinguishing it from true albinism. Other differences from albinism, not commented on earlier, included differences in the spontaneous and optokinetic nystagmus.
Maumenee (1986) expressed the opinion that this disorder may be a variety of achromatopsia.
Weleber et al. (1989) pointed out that newer electrophysiologic techniques, including electroretinography, show many differences between this disorder and OA1; however, the disorder showed some similarities to X-linked incomplete congenital stationary night blindness (300071).
Glass et al. (1991, 1993) reported studies of a 6-generation family with 9 affected males and 14 obligatory carriers. Clinical features included severely reduced visual acuity, nystagmus, high axial myopia, foveal hypoplasia, and protanomalous color vision deficiency associated with minor fundal depigmentation. Although impaired night vision was not a symptom, psychophysical and electrophysiologic testing showed that both rod and cone function were abnormal in all affected males. No abnormality was detected in carrier females. The findings were similar to those previously reported in both CSNB2A and AIED.
Jalkanen et al. (2007) stated that although AIED and CSNB2A are allelic disorders, there are a few distinct differences between the symptoms of the patients in the original AIED family and those described as having CSNB2A. AIED has progressive myopic refraction, foveal dysplasia with no foveal reflex, and a protan defect in color vision (303900), whereas CSNB2A is apparently stationary with a normal fovea and mostly normal color vision, with tritan (190900) or mixed defects in some cases. They suggested that the differences my be attributable to differences in genetic background (i.e., other genes or genetic modifiers).
Hawksworth et al. (1995) studied a Welch kindred in which congenital nystagmus and moderate-to-high refractive error segregated as an X-linked trait, with manifestation in some female carriers. Affected males demonstrated myopia, but a high proportion of female carriers and some of the possibly affected males showed hypermetropia. Clinical ophthalmologic examination and electrodiagnostic studies of retinal function were compatible with a diagnosis of either incomplete congenital stationary night blindness or Aland island eye disease. Hawksworth et al. (1995) raised the question of whether the 2 entities are the same.
**Cone-rod dystrophy, X-linked, 3, 300476 (3), XLR**
Cone-rod dystrophy is a retinal disorder with predominantly cone involvement. Rod impairment may occur at the same time as the cone impairment or appear later. Patients with CORD usually have reduced visual acuity, photophobia, and color vision defects (summary by Huang et al., 2013).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of X-linked cone-rod dystrophy, see 304020.
Mantyjarvi et al. (2001) described a large 6-generation Finnish family in which 10 male members, ranging in age from 6 to 81 years, had progressive cone-rod dystrophy. Onset of symptoms was in early childhood for most patients, although some were not diagnosed until the fourth or fifth decade of life. Visual acuities ranged from 20/40 to counting fingers, and all were myopic. Concentrically constricted visual fields were observed in 5 patients, 1 of whom also had central scotomas; of the remaining 5, 3 showed general reduction of sensitivity in the central fields. Of 7 patients in whom color vision was assessed, 6 had red/green or red defects and 1 showed normal color vision. Of 5 patients in whom dark adaptation was examined, all had an elevated rod threshold and 3 also had an elevated cone threshold. Of 5 patients in whom ERG was performed, all exhibited defective cone responses, with 1 also showing reduction of the rod response. Funduscopic examination showed myopic changes and irregular pigmentation in the macular area. Two patients underwent surgery for unilateral retinal detachment. Follow-up over 12 to 14 years of 4 affected family members showed no changes in fundus appearance, visual fields, or dark adaptation; however, visual acuity had decreased in 1 patient, reduced sensitivity of the visual fields was noted in 2, and error scores in the Farnsworth-Munsell 100-hue (FM100) test had increased in 3, suggesting retinal progression of the disease. Examination of 6 obligate carriers showed normal fundi, visual fields, and color vision.
Hauke et al. (2013) examined 4 of 10 affected male members over 3 generations of a large German family with a progressive retinal disorder. Features typical of X-linked cone-rod dystrophy in these patients included slowly progressive loss of visual acuity, moderate to high myopia, color vision defects, elevated cone and rod thresholds in dark adaptation, reduced cone and rod responses on full-field ERGs, and irregular pigmentation in the macular area in the younger patients. In addition, 3 of the 4 exhibited nystagmus, and 2 had astigmatism of more than 1.5 diopters, both of which are features considered atypical in CORDX3. Examination of 2 asymptomatic female obligate carriers showed normal funduscopy, visual fields, and color vision, with responses in the low-normal range on ERGs.
**Night blindness, congenital stationary (incomplete), 2A, X-linked, 300071 (3), X-linked**
X-linked congenital stationary night blindness is a nonprogressive retinal disorder characterized by decreased visual acuity and loss of night vision. Bergen et al. (1995) stated that X-linked CSNB (CSNBX) is clinically heterogeneous with respect to the involvement of retinal rods and/or cones in the disease. The classic form of X-linked congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB1; 310500) is associated with myopia.
All affected members of the family mapped by Bergen et al. (1996) to Xp21.1 had myopia and a fine horizontal nystagmus. None of them experienced deterioration, during an average follow-up of 5 years, of their visual acuity or ERG recordings. The 6 obligate carriers and 1 possible carrier had normal visual acuity, no myopia, and no abnormalities on ERG. The affected males, apart from night blindness as shown by the dark adaptation curves, had no clinical or electrophysiologic signs of retinitis pigmentosa.



CYP11A1
**Adrenal insufficiency, congenital, with 46XY sex reversal, partial or complete, 613743 (3)**
P450scc deficiency is a rare disorder that can present as acute adrenal insufficiency in infancy or childhood. ACTH and plasma renin activity are grossly elevated and adrenal steroids are inappropriately low or absent; the 46,XY patients have female external genitalia, sometimes with clitoromegaly. The phenotypic spectrum ranges from prematurity, complete underandrogenization, and severe early-onset adrenal failure to term birth with clitoromegaly and later-onset adrenal failure (summary by Kim et al., 2008).
Although hormonal and phenotypic features can resemble those of congenital lipoid adrenal hyperplasia (lipoid CAH; 201710), no patient with P450scc deficiency has been described with the massive adrenal enlargement typical of lipoid CAH (summary by Sahakitrungruang et al., 2011).
In studying patients with clinical features of lipoid CAH, Tajima et al. (2001) encountered an individual with a heterozygous mutation in P450scc. The patient presented at 4 years of age with lethargy and hyperpigmentation. Serum sodium and potassium were both normal, but ACTH was extremely elevated, plasma aldosterone was elevated, and cortisol was low. The karyotype was 46,XY; the patient had clitoromegaly, no labial fusion, and separate vaginal and urethral openings. Computed tomographic and ultrasonographic examinations revealed no hypertrophy of the adrenal glands, and no uterus. Inguinal hernias had been diagnosed at 2 years of age, and inguinal masses had been resected at another clinic; Tajima et al. (2001) remarked that these were probably testes. Vaginography demonstrated a blind vaginal pouch. The patient was treated with hydrocortisone and 9-alpha-fluorocortisone; she became more active and the hyperpigmentation disappeared. Tajima et al. (2001) noted that the slower, more insidious onset of adrenal insufficiency and absence of enlarged adrenals were atypical of lipoid CAH.
Katsumata et al. (2002) reported a child with congenital adrenal insufficiency who at the age of 7 months presented with hyperpigmentation and markedly elevated ACTH levels. At the age of 9 months, endocrinologic investigation revealed increased levels of ACTH and inappropriately normal levels of cortisol, aldosterone (high normal), and 17-alpha-hydroxyprogesterone. Electrolyte and plasma glucose levels were normal. The karyotype was 46,XX. Serum FSH (136530) approached the upper limit of normal, suggesting to Katsumata et al. (2002) the possibility of early ovarian insufficiency. The patient was successfully treated with hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone.
Hiort et al. (2005) described a patient who presented with severe adrenal insufficiency in the first days of life. The child was born at 31 weeks' gestation. The karyotype was 46,XY; the baby's phenotype was unequivocally female with an unusual bronze skin color. Severe salt wasting was present in the neonatal period. Plasma ACTH and renin activity were extremely elevated. Plasma cortisol and 17-hydroxyprogesterone were undetectable. The child developed respiratory failure and was put on a respiratory ventilator. Treatment with hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone produced rapid improvement. Urinary steroid analysis at the age of 2 months did not demonstrate any excretion of 3-beta-hydroxy-5-ene steroids, suggesting complete loss of steroidogenesis. Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging failed to demonstrate gonads or adrenal tissue, and no uterus was seen.
Al Kandari et al. (2006) reported a 46,XY phenotypic female who presented with life-threatening adrenal insufficiency at the age of 1 year 9 months. Generalized tanning of skin was present with markedly increased pigmentation of lips and gums, nape of neck, and abdomen. ACTH and plasma renin activity were extremely elevated, with very low or undetectable aldosterone. Treatment with hydrocortisone and fludrocortisone produced dramatic improvement. External genitalia were those of a normal female. Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging identified bilateral small gonads in inguinal regions, and adrenal glands of normal size. Genitogram showed short, blunt-ended vagina. Computed tomography revealed complete agenesis of the corpus callosum. Developmental milestones had been normal to this time.
Kim et al. (2008) reviewed the findings in all patients reported to that time with P450scc deficiency, including the patients described by Tajima et al. (2001), Katsumata et al. (2002), Hiort et al. (2005), and Al Kandari et al. (2006), as well as 2 new patients. They noted that the phenotypic spectrum ranged from prematurity, complete underandrogenization, and severe early-onset adrenal failure resulting from severe loss-of-function mutations (Hiort et al., 2005) to term birth with clitoromegaly and later-onset adrenal failure resulting from partial deficiency (Tajima et al., 2001). In all cases ACTH and plasma renin activity were grossly elevated and adrenal steroids were inappropriately low or absent. In contradistinction to the massive adrenal enlargement typically seen in lipoid CAH, caused by mutation in StAR (600617), none of the 6 patients with P450scc deficiency had been reported to have adrenal hyperplasia.
Rubtsov et al. (2009) described a patient with P450scc deficiency who showed no overt signs of adrenal insufficiency until the age of 9 years, when he began to experience episodes of weakness, dizziness, and vomiting. At birth he presented with bilateral cryptorchidism with inguinal testes, midshaft hypospadias, and bilateral talipes equinovarus. Karyotype was 46,XY. Ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging showed normal-sized adrenals. The patient's twin, a phenotypic female, had died at age 2.5 years after an unknown illness presenting with weakness and cyanosis.
Sahakitrungruang et al. (2011) described 2 sibs with hormonal findings suggesting nonclassic lipoid CAH who had mutations in P450scc that retained partial function. A 46,XY male presented with underdeveloped genitalia and partial adrenal insufficiency; his 46,XX sister presented with adrenal insufficiency. Both sibs had small adrenals with calcifications.
Sahakitrungruang et al. (2011) noted that most cases of P450scc deficiency reported to that time had presented with the hormonal and phenotypic features of classic lipoid CAH, although none had been described with the massive adrenal enlargement typical of lipoid CAH. Patients with the 'classic' forms of both P450scc deficiency and lipoid CAH typically present with adrenal failure and salt wasting in infancy and are phenotypically female irrespective of genetic sex. The nonclassic forms of the disorders present with varying degrees of retained adrenal function and sexual development.



TOP3A
**Microcephaly, growth restriction, and increased sister chromatid exchange 2, 618097 (3), AR**
MGRISCE2 is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by intrauterine growth restriction, poor postnatal growth with short stature and microcephaly, and increased sister chromatid exchange on cell studies. The disorder results from defective DNA decatenation. The pathogenesis of the disorder is similar to that of Bloom syndrome (BLM; 210900), but patients with mutations in the TOP3A gene do not have a malar rash (summary by Martin et al., 2018).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of MGRISCE, see Bloom syndrome (BLM; MGRISCE1; 210900)
Martin et al. (2018) reported 10 patients from 7 unrelated families with growth failure. The patients, who ranged in age from 5 months to 15 years, had intrauterine growth retardation, low birth growth parameters, and poor postnatal growth (weight between -2.7 and -7.5 SD, height between -2.7 to -5.8 SD), as well as microcephaly -2.3 to -5.7 SD. Multiple cafe-au-lait patches were observed in some patients, but none had a malar rash. Several patients had dilated cardiomyopathy, including 2 who died of the heart disease. Additional less common features included mild developmental delay (4 patients), decreased subcutaneous fat (3 patients), recurrent infections (3 patients), and gastroesophageal reflux (2 patients). Photographs of some of the patients provided in the article suggested dysmorphic facial features, including frontal bossing and progeroid features in some. Skeletal muscle biopsy from 1 patient showed 87% mitochondrial DNA depletion; this measurement was not available from the other patients. None of the patients had malignancies, but Martin et al. (2018) noted that they were still young at the time of report.
**?Progressive external ophthalmoplegia with mitochondrial DNA deletions, autosomal recessive 5, 618098 (3), AR**
Nicholls et al. (2018) reported a 67-year-old woman who presented with slowly progressive ptosis, intermittent double vision, mild dysphagia and nasal regurgitation, and sensorineural hearing loss. Additional features included rapid cycling mood disorder, cardiac arrhythmias necessitating a pacemaker, exercise intolerance, and cerebellar ataxia. Physical examination was consistent with progressive external ophthalmoplegia, and other findings included dysarthria, proximal limb and neck muscle weakness, upper limb dysmetria, and broad-based gait. Nerve conduction studies showed a mild sensory neuropathy, and brain imaging showed cerebellar atrophy and symmetric changes in the thalami and midbrain. Echocardiogram showed impaired left ventricular function, ectopic beats, and tachycardia. Patient skeletal muscle biopsy showed numerous COX-deficient ragged-red fibers, increased mtDNA deletions (over 80%), and extensive variable mtDNA rearrangements.



MYO18B
**Klippel-Feil syndrome 4, autosomal recessive, with myopathy and facial dysmorphism, 616549 (3), AR**
Klippel-Feil syndrome-4 with nemaline myopathy and facial dysmorphism is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized mainly by severe hypotonia apparent from infancy. Klippel-Feil anomaly is primarily defined by fusion of the cervical spine, with associated low posterior hairline and limited neck mobility being observed in about half of patients (summary by Alazami et al., 2015).
For a general description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Klippel-Feil syndrome, see KFS1 (118100).
Alazami et al. (2015) studied an unrelated Saudi boy and girl with Klippel-Feil syndrome who also exhibited myopathy, mild short stature, microcephaly, and distinctive facies. The 14-year-old boy, born of consanguineous parents, presented at 16 months of age with motor delay and short stature, at which time microcephaly was also noted. He was floppy in infancy, sat at age 1 year, and walked at 2 years. Examination at 12.5 years of age revealed central and peripheral hypotonia and +4 muscle power (reduced resistance). Since childhood, his gait had been clumsy with frequent falls. Brain MRI was normal, but electromyography was suggestive of myopathy. Muscle biopsy showed mild to focally moderate variation in myofiber size, with atrophic and hypertrophic fibers. Ultrastructural examination showed diffuse myofibrillar disarray with prominent loss or disruption of myosin filaments. Focally, some fibers showed subsarcolemmal accumulation of globular deposits of electron-dense material, reminiscent of nemaline rods, and there was loss of normal banding due to loss of thick myosin filaments. The 12-year-old Saudi girl, born of first-cousin parents, had poor motor function in infancy but attained standing and walking at appropriate ages. Mild muscle weakness was present on examination, but no muscle biopsy was done. Both patients exhibited dysmorphic features including short webbed neck, low posterior hairline, bilateral ptosis, and bulbous nose with hypoplastic alae nasi. X-ray revealed fusion of the cervical spine in both, and the girl also had dextroconvex thoracolumbar scoliosis and bilateral acetabular dysplasia.
Clinical Variability
Malfatti et al. (2015) reported a female infant, born of consanguineous Portuguese parents, with severe nemaline myopathy and fatal cardiomyopathy. Prenatal ultrasound at 22 weeks' gestation showed reduced left ventricle and aortic valve growth. After birth, the infant showed hypotonia with reduced spontaneous movements, tendon contractures, and poor feeding. She also had dysmorphic features, including transversal enlargement of the skull, small and horizontal palpebral fissures, high-arched palate, low-set ears, pectus excavatum, large and low implanted thumbs, and clinodactyly. Cardiac abnormalities included hypertrophic left cavities, interatrial communication, and pulmonary hypertension. She had hemodynamic instability and poor respiratory status, resulting in death at age 4.5 months. Muscle biopsy showed marked fiber size variability and atrophic fibers with rare centralized nuclei. Small nemaline bodies were found in about 40% of fibers. Postmortem examination was not performed. Malfatti et al. (2015) noted that Klippel-Feil syndrome was diagnosed during childhood in the patients reported by Alazami et al. (2015), whereas their Portuguese patient died at 4.5 months of age; radiographs were not performed on the patient reported by Malfatti et al. (2015). Malfatti et al. (2015) suggested that the cardiomyopathy observed in this patient may be variant-specific, since a truncated MYO18B protein was detected in muscle samples from the infant; this may have caused a toxic effect as opposed to complete loss of MYO18B that was found in the patients reported by Alazami et al. (2015). Mutations in major nemaline myopathy genes had been excluded in the patient reported by Malfatti et al. (2015); she was 1 of 34 patients with mild nemaline myopathy and 17 with severe nemaline myopathy who underwent exome sequencing.



SYP
**Mental retardation, X-linked 96, 300802 (3), XLR**
Tarpey et al. (2009) identified 4 families with X-linked mental retardation who had mutations in the SYP gene. In 3 families, all with truncating mutations, mental retardation was mild to moderate and there were no consistent additional features, although epilepsy was noted in some individuals. Female carriers had no manifestations.



CUX1
**Global developmental delay with or without impaired intellectual development, 618330 (3), AD**
Platzer et al. (2018) reported 9 individuals, including a mother and 2 children, from 7 families with global developmental delay. All 9 had speech delay and 7 had motor delay. Clinical information provided for 8 individuals showed that 2 had moderate intellectual disability (ID) at ages 3 years and 5 years, and 3 had mild ID at ages 12 years, 12 years, and 32 years. Three had intelligence at normal ranges at ages 4, 6, and 8 years, with IQ testing available for 2 (IQ values of 82 and 95). No individuals showed signs of regression. Average age of unassisted walking was around 24 months, with a range of 16 to 42 months. Hypotonia was present in 3 individuals, with 1 using a wheelchair for distances over 100 meters at age 4 years. Two individuals had borderline short stature. Two individuals had patent ductus arteriosus and 2 had hypospadias. Four individuals had brain MRI, which showed no major abnormalities or malformations.





VPS13B
**Cohen syndrome, 216550 (3), AR**
Cohen syndrome is an autosomal recessive multisystem disorder characterized by many clinical features, including facial dysmorphism, microcephaly, truncal obesity, impaired intellectual development, progressive retinopathy, and intermittent congenital neutropenia (summary by Duplomb et al., 2014).
Cohen syndrome is one of the rare autosomal recessive disorders that are overrepresented in the Finnish population (Norio, 2003). The phenotype in Finnish patients is highly homogeneous, consisting of nonprogressive mild to severe psychomotor retardation, motor clumsiness, microcephaly, characteristic facial features, childhood hypotonia and joint laxity, progressive retinochoroidal dystrophy, myopia, intermittent isolated neutropenia, and a cheerful disposition. Characteristic facial features include high-arched or wave-shaped eyelids, a short philtrum, thick hair, and low hairline. Kolehmainen et al. (2003) stated that in non-Finnish patients thought to have Cohen syndrome, a confusing phenotypic variability prevails. Obesity, although frequently mentioned as a characteristic finding, is insignificant. On the other hand, there is no proof of retinochoroidal dystrophy or intermittent neutropenia in reports of some patients. Chandler et al. (2003) studied 33 non-Finnish patients with Cohen syndrome and concluded that Cohen syndrome has a distinctive clinical phenotype identifiable not only in Finnish patients but also in other genetically diverse patient groups.
Cohen et al. (1973) described a brother and sister and an unrelated patient with hypotonia, obesity, high nasal bridge, and prominent incisors as well as mental deficiency. Carey and Hall (1978) reported 4 additional patients. Sack and Friedman (1980) observed the syndrome in a 10-year-old girl with excessive height and floppy mitral valve. Intrafamilial variability suggested that the diagnosis may often be difficult. Kousseff (1981) described 4 affected sibs (2 of each sex) with moderate mental retardation, microcephaly, hypotonia, high nasal bridge, and narrow hands and feet with elongated fingers and toes. Three sibs were short of stature. Friedman and Sack (1982) reported 5 additional cases in 4 families, strengthening the conclusion of autosomal recessive inheritance. Mental retardation, high nasal bridge, prominent central incisors with open mouth, maxillary malar hypoplasia, and antimongoloid slant of the eyes were features. They suggested that the disorder may have a relatively high frequency in Ashkenazi Jews.
Since 1968, Norio et al. (1984) had observed patients with the same disorder, known by them as the 'Pepper syndrome,' from the family name. By 1984, they found reports of 25 cases (Balestrazzi et al., 1980; Goecke et al., 1982) and added 6 Finnish patients. Norio et al. (1984) added chorioretinal dystrophy and granulocytopenia to the clinical features and observed parental consanguinity in 2 instances. Ophthalmologic findings included decreased visual acuity, hemeralopia (see 310500 for a discussion of the use of the terms hemeralopia and nyctalopia), constricted visual fields, chorioretinal dystrophy with bull's-eye-like maculae and pigmentary deposits, optic atrophy, and isoelectric electroretinogram.
Fuhrmann-Rieger et al. (1984) pointed out the similarities of the Prader-Willi syndrome (176270) and Cohen syndrome. (See also Fraccaro et al., 1983).
North et al. (1985) reported 6 cases in 4 sibships. Periureteric obstruction and epilepsy were reported as possible new features. In Israel, where the Cohen syndrome seems to be unusually frequent, Sack and Friedman (1986) studied 39 patients in 32 families. Neutropenia and chorioretinal dysplasia, 2 manifestations found in all Finnish patients by Norio et al. (1984), were not found in any of these patients. Incorrect diagnoses included Marfan syndrome, Sotos syndrome, hypothyroidism, minimal brain dysfunction, and, most frequently, 'mental retardation of an unknown cause,' illustrating the difficulty of being certain of the diagnosis.
Young and Moore (1987) described 3 affected sibs. Abnormalities present in all 3 children included mental retardation, hypotonia, and short philtrum with open mouth and prominent lips. Whereas the 2 older sibs had similar facies and an engaging personality, the youngest had a different facial appearance and marked behavioral problems. Mehes et al. (1988) found mitral valve prolapse and severe gastroesophageal reflux with hiatal hernia in an affected girl aged 2 years and 4 months. These observations, along with others previously reported, suggested that Cohen syndrome may be a connective tissue disorder.
Kondo et al. (1990) described 2 affected brothers from a consanguineous marriage who also had leukopenia and mottled retina. Kondo et al. (1990) pointed out that mottled retina had been observed in 22 of 87 patients and that it appears to be family- and ethnic-specific. Among 19 familial cases, mottled retina was observed in all affected sibs from 5 families, but in 13 families none of the affected sibs had mottled retinas. All Finnish patients had the mottled retina, but this was noted in only 1 of 39 Jewish patients. Based on these observations, Kondo et al. (1990) suggested that there are 2 alleles at the gene locus for the Cohen syndrome: one for a Finnish type with mottled retina and the other for a Jewish type without retinal anomalies. They concurred with Norio and Raitta (1986) that the Mirhosseini-Holmes-Walton syndrome (268050) is the same as Cohen syndrome, or at least an allelic disorder.
Steinlein et al. (1991) described 2 brothers with findings fitting the diagnosis of both the Cohen and the Mirhosseini-Holmes-Walton syndromes but also showing severe ocular manifestations. Tapetoretinal degeneration was documented by histopathologic studies. The younger brother suffered total retinal detachment bilaterally, requiring enucleation.
Warburg et al. (1990) were of the opinion that a retinitis pigmentosa-like tapetoretinal degeneration is an 'obligatory sign' in patients with Cohen syndrome. Their patient also had granulocytopenia.
Massa et al. (1991) described isolated growth hormone deficiency in a girl with Cohen syndrome. Satisfactory catch-up growth occurred after treatment with biosynthetic human growth hormone. Fryns et al. (1991) reported a successful pregnancy in a 26-year-old woman with presumed Cohen syndrome. Her offspring had slight psychomotor retardation but was not thought to have the Cohen syndrome.
Norio (1993) indicated that the diagnosis of Cohen syndrome is suggested by the short philtrum (which is unable to cover the upper incisors), prominent root of the nose, and prominent upper central incisors. The feet are often small, and there is usually an increased space between toes 1 and 2 ('sandal groove'). The neutropenia is intermittent and harmless.
Higgins et al. (1994) demonstrated pyridoxine-responsive hyper-beta-alaninemia in a 4-year-old girl with some features of Cohen syndrome. She had crooked teeth, a small philtrum, narrow hands, and global developmental delay. Ophthalmic examination was not reported and there was no mention of obesity.
Schlichtemeier et al. (1994) described probable Cohen syndrome in African American brother and sister. The brother, who presented at age 13 years with new-onset seizures, sagittal sinus thrombosis with cerebral hemorrhage, and extensive venous thrombosis of the lower limbs, showed combined deficiency of protein C, protein S, and antithrombin III. Carotid aneurysm and tortuous descending aorta were also present. Schlichtemeier et al. (1994) suggested that vasculopathy may be an integral part of the Cohen syndrome.
North et al. (1995) reported the cases of identical female twins with Cohen syndrome. They presented with retinal degeneration, obesity, and mental retardation, and had the characteristic facial appearance. Unusual features of the twins included tall stature, macrocephaly, and transient cardiomyopathy during the first year of life. Precocious puberty was present in both girls; the development of breast buds and axillary hair was noted at the age 7.5 years.
Kivitie-Kallio et al. (1997) reported hematologic data on 26 Finnish patients with Cohen syndrome. All had experienced periods of isolated granulocytopenia from an early age. Granulocytopenia was mild to moderate, noncyclic, and never fatal. Most patients suffered from prolonged or repeated gingival or skin infections. In 16 patients studied in detail, bone marrow examination showed a normo- or hypercellular marrow, with a left-shifted granulopoiesis in 8 of the 16 patients. The response to adrenaline stimulation was subnormal in 12 of 14 and to hydrocortisone in 8 of 16 patients, but administration of recombinant GCSF (138970) caused granulocytosis in the 3 patients studied. No bone marrow malignancies were seen.
Olivieri et al. (1998) studied the bone marrow and the functional properties of neutrophils obtained from peripheral blood or skin window exudates from a patient with Cohen syndrome. Neutrophil adhesive capability was greatly increased in this patient. Cytofluorometric expression of CD11B (120980) and CD62L molecules were consistent with a generalized neutrophil activation in vivo. The patient was a 22-year-old girl with neutropenia and recurrent gingivitis. A tentative diagnosis of Prader-Willi syndrome had been made in childhood. However, her features, including obesity, hypotonia, microcephaly, chorioretinal dystrophy, high nasal bridge, narrow hands and feet, narrow and high-arched palate, and prominent central incisors, were more consistent with Cohen syndrome.
In 3 patients with Cohen syndrome, Okamoto et al. (1998) found a remarkably high level of urinary hyaluronic acid. They pointed out that hyperhyaluronic aciduria is a characteristic finding in Werner syndrome (277700) and some other conditions. Okamoto et al. (1998) suggested that the basic defect in Cohen syndrome involves a metabolic abnormality in the extracellular matrix.
Kivitie-Kallio et al. (1998) performed MRI on 18 patients with Cohen syndrome and 26 healthy volunteers. The main finding was a relatively enlarged corpus callosum. A relatively enlarged corpus callosum in a microcephalic head and normal signal intensities of the gray and white matters supports a clinical suspicion of Cohen syndrome.
Kivitie-Kallio et al. (1999) evaluated cardiac, endocrine, and radiologic abnormalities in 22 patients of Finnish descent with Cohen syndrome. No evidence for clinically significant mitral prolapse was found; however, a decreased left ventricular function with advancing age was identified. No significant endocrine abnormalities were found in examination of pituitary, adrenal, and thyroid function. The patients were either of normal height or were moderately short at all ages, often associated with marked kyphosis. Truncal obesity was seen in 4 of the 22 patients. X-rays of the chest, lumbar and thoracic spine, long bones, ankles, and metacarpophalangeal pattern profiles revealed kyphosis, scoliosis, and calcaneo planovalgus as common features. Fingers of these patients were slender but short with a characteristic metacarpophalangeal pattern profile.
Horn et al. (2000) reported 2 brothers and a cousin from a multiply consanguineous kindred of Lebanese descent with a syndrome of microcephaly, progressive postnatal growth deficiency, mental retardation, hypotonia, chorioretinal dystrophy, and myopia. The severity of the condition varied among the affected family members. Horn et al. (2000) suggested that the syndrome they reported, the Cohen syndrome, and the Mirhosseini-Holmes-Walton syndrome may be the same or allelic disorders.
Kivitie-Kallio et al. (2000) reported ophthalmologic findings from 22 Finnish patients with Cohen syndrome.
Hurmerinta et al. (2002) pointed to the fact that Cohen syndrome is relatively common in Finland, where 35 patients had been diagnosed. They obtained anthropometric measurements of the head and face of 22 patients, and cephalometric radiographs of 14 patients. Anthropometric analysis confirmed and quantified the small head size. Width of the upper face was close to normal but width of the lower face was small. The philtrum was shorter than in healthy controls. Measurements from standardized radiographs showed short cranial base dimensions but normal cranial base angles. Most patients had forward-inclined upper incisors and maxillary prognathia.
De Ravel et al. (2002) reevaluated a brother and sister, the offspring of first cousins, who were originally reported by Buntinx et al. (1991) as representing an apparently new syndrome of mental retardation, short stature, unusual face, radioulnar synostosis, and retinal pigment abnormalities. De Ravel et al. (2002) concluded that the 55-year-old brother and 52-year-old sister had Cohen syndrome. Both had neutropenia and the male had persistent fluctuating thrombocytopenia. De Ravel et al. (2002) stated that asymptomatic thrombocytopenia had not previously been reported in Cohen syndrome.
In their series of 33 non-Finnish patients with Cohen syndrome, Chandler et al. (2003) identified laryngeal abnormalities, including laryngomalacia, laryngeal stenosis, and vocal cord paralysis, as an associated feature.
Karpf et al. (2004) reported findings on cognitive, linguistic, and adaptive profiles in a group of 45 individuals clinically diagnosed with Cohen syndrome at ages varying from 4 to 49 years. Independence levels were generally poor, but socialization skills were relatively less impaired. This particular area of strength was thought to underlie the 'sociable' temperament typically associated with Cohen syndrome. The range of cognitive ability was wider in this study than reported in most previous studies, raising the issue of whether mental retardation should be considered a necessary component of the phenotype.
Kolehmainen et al. (2004) undertook an extensive molecular assessment of 76 patients from 59 families with a provisional diagnosis of Cohen syndrome and correlated molecular and clinical findings. The patients were assessed for the following 8 clinical criteria: developmental delay, microcephaly, typical Cohen syndrome facial gestalt, truncal obesity with slender extremities, overly sociable behavior, joint hypermobility, high myopia and/or retinal dystrophy, and neutropenia. Patients fulfilling 6 or more criteria were considered likely to have true Cohen syndrome. Those with lower scores (5 of 8 or fewer) were considered provisionally to have a Cohen-like syndrome. Kolehmainen et al. (2004) found 22 different COH1 mutations, of which 19 were novel, in probands identified by these diagnostic criteria. In addition, they identified another 3 novel mutations in patients with incomplete clinical data. By contrast, no COH1 mutations were found in patients with a provisional diagnosis of Cohen syndrome who were labeled 'Cohen-like.'
Falk et al. (2004) described 8 members of 2 large Amish kindreds who had early-onset pigmentary retinopathy and myopia, global developmental delay and mental retardation, microcephaly, short stature, hypotonia, joint hyperextensibility, small hands and feet, and a friendly disposition. Several of the children had intermittent granulocytopenia. Affected individuals shared a common facial appearance involving mild synophrys, hypertelorism, wide and wave-shaped palpebral fissures, low nasal bridge with a pinched root and bulbous tip, smooth philtrum, thin upper lip, and hypotonic facies. They appeared to grimace when smiling. Although the facial gestalt was considered inconsistent with the diagnosis of Cohen syndrome, sequencing of the COH1 gene revealed compound homozygosity in all affected individuals for both a frameshift (607817.0009) and a missense (607817.0010) mutation in the COH1 gene. Falk et al. (2004) concluded that facial gestalt is an unreliable indicator of Cohen syndrome between ethnic populations, although it is consistent among affected individuals within a particular ethnic group.
Waite et al. (2010) reported 3 patients, including 2 patients of Pakistani descent from a consanguineous kindred who were distally related, with genetically confirmed Cohen syndrome. All had the typical facial appearance, developmental delay, and ocular anomalies, and all also had cerebellar hypoplasia on brain imaging, which Waite et al. (2010) concluded may be a feature of this disorder.
Rivera-Brugues et al. (2011) reported 3 patients with genetically confirmed Cohen syndrome who were younger than 3 years of age. None had neutropenia, and only 1 had mildly increased pigmentation of the retina. Common features included hypotonic facial expression, almond-shaped eyes, prominent nose, short philtrum, delayed psychomotor development, and mental retardation. The authors noted that the facial phenotype and some additional features of the disorder change with time.
Clinical Variability
Gueneau et al. (2014) described a 33-year-old woman who had recurrent infections in infancy and childhood, and was diagnosed with chronic and intermittent neutropenia. Speech and motor development was normal. At 25 years of age, she had reduced visual fields and retinal abnormalities, and was diagnosed with retinal dystrophy. Upon examination at 33 years of age, she had short stature, borderline microcephaly, and the typical facial gestalt for Cohen syndrome: facial dysmorphism included moderate downslanting palpebral fissures, convex and high nasal bridge, malar hypoplasia, short philtrum, and mild ptosis. She had slender extremities but no joint hypermobility or truncal obesity. In addition, her intellectual development was normal; she had attended high school and had a reported IQ of 100. Funduscopy revealed moderate pigmentary retinopathy with rare bone spicule-shaped pigment deposits in the periphery and macular edema. Electroretinography revealed severely decreased responses in both scotopic and photopic conditions, indicating that both rod and cone photoreceptor responses were impaired.
Megarbane et al. (2001) described a nonconsanguineous Lebanese family in which 2 brothers had a seemingly distinct syndrome comprising microcephaly, primary cutis verticis gyrata, progressive retinitis pigmentosa, cataracts, sensorineural hearing loss, and mental retardation. The brothers were 41 and 53 years of age. In the older brother the scalp features had appeared 10 years earlier. In the younger brother visual problems became obvious at age 12 and the auditory problem at age 30. Night blindness had been noted from age 20. By a genomewide scan in this family, Megarbane et al. (2009) found a region of homozygosity by descent in the region of chromosome 8 containing the VPS13B gene. Sequencing of this gene identified a homozygous mutation (607817.0016) in the affected brothers that segregated with the disorder in the family. Megarbane et al. (2009) noted that the features in the brothers were compatible with Cohen syndrome with the additional features of cutis verticis gyrata and sensorineural deafness. They also noted that the hearing loss and cutis verticis gyrata could be caused by mutations in a different gene and locus, but that their linkage data did not support the presence of another causative homozygous locus and no deafness gene or locus had been identified on chromosome 8q. Because cutis verticis gyrata is frequently associated with mental retardation, they suggested that it may be a rare manifestation of Cohen syndrome.



AKT3
**Megalencephaly-polymicrogyria-polydactyly-hydrocephalus syndrome 2, 615937 (3), AD**
MPPH2 is an overgrowth syndrome comprising megalencephaly, hydrocephalus, and polymicrogyria; polydactyly may also be seen. There is considerable phenotypic similarity between this disorder and the megalencephaly-capillary malformation syndrome (MCAP; 602501) (summary by Gripp et al., 2009).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of MPPH, see 603387.
Riviere et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated patients with MPPH2. One patient (LR11-354) was a 2.5-year-old girl with macrocephaly, hydrocephalus, polymicrogyria, and connective tissue dysplasia. She did not have vascular malformations, syndactyly, or polydactyly. The other patient (LR08-018) was an 11-month-old boy with macrocephaly, hydrocephalus, polymicrogyria, cerebellar tonsillar ectopia, and connective tissue dysplasia. He also had vascular malformations that were not cutaneous or on the face or body. He did not have polydactyly or syndactyly. This patient had previously been reported by Mirzaa et al. (2012).
Nakamura et al. (2014) reported a 2-month-old boy with macrocephaly, cutis marmorata of the distal extremities, and hyperextensibility of the skin. Brain MRI at age 7 days showed right-dominant polymicrogyria, and at 2 months showed a thin corpus callosum and progressive hydrocephalus. Nakamura et al. (2014) stated that the phenotype was compatible with MCAP; however, the patient had only a skin capillary malformation. Genetic analysis identified a de novo heterozygous mutation in the AKT3 gene (N229S; 611223.0002). Nakamura et al. (2014) concluded that MPPH and MCAP show significant phenotypic overlap and have a common genetic basis.



B3GLCT
**Peters-plus syndrome, 261540 (3), AR**
Patients with Peters-plus syndrome exhibit ocular features, systemic malformations, and variable degrees of developmental delay. Ocular abnormalities involve the anterior chamber, and in most patients consist of Peters anomaly, which is characterized by corneal clouding and iridolenticulocorneal adhesions. Growth retardation, short stature, and brachydactyly appear to be present in all patients, and developmental delay is frequent, whereas external ear anomalies, cleft lip and/or palate, and cardiac and genitourinary malformations are less common (Dassie-Ajdid et al., 2009).
According to van Schooneveld et al. (1984), Peters (1906) described 3 brothers with the disorder that bears his name (Peters anomaly; see ASGD5, 604229). The features of Peters anomaly, a major error in the embryonic development of the eye, are corneal clouding and variable iridolenticulocorneal adhesions. Van Schooneveld et al. (1984) described 11 cases of what they referred to as Peters-plus syndrome. The series included unlike sex twins, both affected, and affected sisters. The parents were consanguineous in 1 case. All the patients had Peters anomaly, were short of stature, and showed brachymorphism and abnormal ears. Several of them had cleft lip and palate. The brachymorphism was most evident in the hands. In most cases the fifth finger was short and showed clinodactyly. Severe mental retardation was present in some.
Kivlin et al. (1986) suggested that Peters anomaly, since it occurs with many syndromes both genetic and nongenetic, is a morphologic entity but not a specific causal entity. Kivlin et al. (1986) reported association of Peters anomaly and short-limb dwarfism in a brother and sister. Both had thin upper lip, hypoplastic columella, and round face. Apparently balanced reciprocal translocation, 46,XY,t(2q-;15q+)(q21;q26.1), in the brother only, was thought to be coincidental.
Thompson and Winter (1988) described a 14-month-old male with extensive congenital bilateral corneal opacification, short stature, and short limbs. They pointed out a striking resemblance of the facies to that in other patients with Peters anomaly and short limbs (Krause et al., 1969; Saal et al., 1988); specifically, the face was round and the lips thin with hypoplastic columella, smooth philtrum, and mild micrognathia. The appearance of the mouth and upper lip was particularly distinctive.
Saal et al. (1988) described an autosomal recessive syndrome resembling Robinow syndrome (180700). Two sisters had short stature, mesomelic brachymelia, macrocephaly, and hypoplastic genitalia. Setting that disorder apart from Robinow syndrome were anterior chamber cleavage anomalies (resembling Peters anomaly or Rieger anomaly) seen in both girls and hydrocephalus seen in the younger sister. One of the sisters also had cleft lip and palate. De Almeida et al. (1991) reported the cases of a brother and sister with similar features and consanguineous parents. They thought that the disorder in these sibs was the same as that described by van Schooneveld et al. (1984) as the Peters-plus syndrome. The first-born child in the family reported by de Almeida et al. (1991), who died soon after birth, had clefts.
Frydman et al. (1991) found this syndrome in 2 cousins and an unrelated patient, all offspring of consanguineous parents. Communicating hydrocephalus (or brain atrophy) and polyhydramnios were found in 2 patients, potentially allowing prenatal diagnosis in secondary familial cases. Ishikiriyama et al. (1992) reported a Japanese case. Bilateral corneal opacities were noted at birth. Adhesion of the iris to the cornea, glaucoma, and corneolenticular approximation, all features of Peters anomaly, were found. Physical examination at 9 months showed also depressed nasal bridge, anteverted nostrils, short columella nasi, thin vermilion border of the upper lip, micrognathia, short limbs, tapering brachydactyly, and clinodactyly of the 5th fingers. Development was delayed. Cranial CT scan showed dilatation of the subarachnoid spaces as well as evidence of cerebral atrophy.
In a review of Peters-plus syndrome, Maillette de Buy Wenniger-Prick and Hennekam (2002) stated that more than 50 cases were known, including their own unpublished cases. Inheritance was clearly autosomal recessive. Most cases have prenatal growth retardation and, postnatally, are disproportionately short. Mental delay was present in 83%. Cupid bow shape of the upper lip with a thin vermilion border is a feature; cleft lip, sometimes accompanied by cleft palate, was found in 45%.



SMARCA2
**Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome, 601358 (3), AD**
Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome (NCBRS) is characterized by severe mental retardation, early-onset seizures, short stature, dysmorphic facial features, and sparse hair (summary by Sousa et al., 2009).
Nicolaides and Baraitser (1993) described a 16-year-old female with mental retardation, sparse hair over the scalp with normal eyebrows and eyelashes, prominent lower lip, brachydactyly, and swelling of the interphalangeal joints. Sousa et al. (2009) reported follow-up of the patient reported by Nicolaides and Baraitser (1993) at age 32 years. She developed recurrent refractory seizures at age 3 years. She lost all language in early adulthood, but was social and enjoyed people. She could only walk short distances with a wide-based gait with hips and knees flexed and bent forward. She used a wheelchair most of the time. Physical examination showed short stature, obesity, complete alopecia, skin wrinkling in the face, neck, and distal limbs, eczema, and an overall aged appearance. Dysmorphic features included brachycephaly, deep-set eyes, narrow nasal bridge, broad nasal base and tip, thick flared alae nasi, low columella, broad and long philtrum, ears with thick overfolded helices, wide mouth, large protruding tongue, thick and everted lower vermilion border, and frequent drooling. She had prominent proximal interphalangeal joints and thick terminal phalanges.
Krajewska-Walasek et al. (1996) reported similar manifestations in a 19-year-old male who had the additional feature of cryptorchidism. Microscopic structure of the hair was normal in both patients. Krajewska-Walasek et al. (1996) proposed that this association might be a distinct syndrome.
Morin et al. (2003) reported 2 unrelated patients with short stature, hypotrichosis, brachydactyly with cone-shaped epiphyses, epilepsy, and severe mental delay. The authors suggested that these 2 additional cases confirmed the existence of this rare disorder and suggested that it be designated Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome.
Sousa et al. (2009) reported 18 patients, including a pair of monozygotic twins, with Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome. The main clinical features included severe mental retardation with absent or limited speech, seizures, short stature, sparse hair, typical facial characteristics, brachydactyly, prominent finger joints, and broad distal phalanges. Many had low birth weight and poor growth, and some had microcephaly. The face was typically triangular, with downslanting and narrow palpebral fissures, periorbital sagging of the skin, narrow nasal bridge, and broad nasal tip with upturned nares. The mouth was wide, with a thin upper vermilion border and thick everted lower vermilion border. Some of the features were noted to progress with time. The main differential diagnosis includes Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS: 135900). Sousa et al. (2009) concluded that NCBRS is a distinct and recognizable entity that may be underdiagnosed.
Of the 36 individuals studied by Van Houdt et al. (2012) with Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome, 34 were considered to have a certain clinical diagnosis and 2 had an uncertain diagnosis. One-third had prenatal growth retardation and more than half had postnatal growth retardation. All had some degree of intellectual disability. Three of 36 had mild intellectual disability, 9 of 36 had moderate, and in 24 of 36 intellectual disability was severe. Twenty-two of 35 assessed had seizures, 19 of 35 had microcephaly, 35 of 36 had sparse hair, and half had increased skin wrinkling. The vast majority had thick anteverted alae nasi; 31 of 36 had broad philtrum; 29 of 36 had long philtrum; 34 of 36 a large mouth; 27 of 36 had thin upper vermilion border; 32 of 36 had thick lower vermilion border; 28 of 35 had prominent interphalangeal joints; 21 of 35 had prominent distal phalanges; and 16 of 32 had short metacarpals and/or metatarsals.
Wolff et al. (2011) reported 3 patients with typical Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome. One patient, who carried a heterozygous missense mutation, had remarkably good developmental progress at age 9 years. He had a borderline IQ of 74 with no autistic features. The other 2 patients reported by Wolff et al. (2011) had severe intellectual disability and autistic features, as well as the typical dysmorphic features noted in Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome. Wolff et al. (2011) remarked that their findings extended the phenotypic spectrum to include borderline intelligence.
Mari et al. (2015) reported 8 unrelated patients with NCBRS who carried heterozygous missense mutations in the SMARCA2 gene. The patients were ascertained from a cohort of 11 patients with a phenotype consistent with NCBRS or Coffin-Siris syndrome who were screened for mutations in the 6 genes of the BAF complex. All had delayed development with very poor speech, coarse facies, low anterior hairline, sparse scalp hair, large mouth with thick lower lip vermilion, and prominent interphalangeal joints. More variable features included thick eyebrows, synophrys, long eyelashes, broad nose with upturned nasal tip and anterverted nares, hypotonia, seizures, feeding problems, and eczema. Functional studies of the variants were not performed.



WWOX
**Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 28, 616211 (3), AR**
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy-28 (DEE28) is an autosomal recessive severe neurologic disorder characterized by the onset of refractory seizures in the first months of life. Affected individuals have severe axial hypotonia and profoundly impaired psychomotor development. More severely affected patients have acquired microcephaly, poor or absent visual contact, and retinal degeneration; early death may occur (summary by Mignot et al., 2015).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of DEE, see 308350.
Abdel-Salam et al. (2014) reported an Egyptian girl, born of consanguineous parents, with a severe lethal neurologic phenotype resulting in death at age 16 months. At age 12 months, the patient had microcephaly (-4.6 SD), poor growth, and lack of psychomotor development. She developed intractable seizures at age 2 months. She had myoclonic movements and hyperreflexia as well as optic atrophy with retinal dysfunction. Brain MRI showed supratentorial atrophy with simplified gyral pattern, hypoplasia of the hippocampus and the temporal lobe, and thin corpus callosum. She was 1 of twins; the other twin was unaffected and heterozygous for the mutation. An older sib had died at age 3 months of a similar disorder. That sib developed seizures at age 40 days and did not follow objects or react to light, suggesting retinal degeneration.
Mignot et al. (2015) reported 5 patients from 4 families with early-onset epileptic encephalopathy. All patients developed pharmacoresistant focal, multifocal, or generalized seizures at a median age of 2 months. EEG was abnormal in all patients; one patient had hypsarrhythmia, consistent with West syndrome. All had profoundly delayed psychomotor development; 2 had progressive microcephaly. Other features included axial hypotonia, variable rigidity, spasticity, hyperreflexia, and hypokinesia. Three patients had poor or absent eye contact, and 2 of these 3 also had abnormal electroretinograms. Brain imaging showed thin corpus callosum, myelination delay, and progressive cerebral atrophy. Two of these patients died. Two sibs had a slightly less severe disorder: although they had preserved eye contact, did not show spasticity, and were able to grab and manipulate objects at age 4 years, they still had profoundly delayed psychomotor development and hypotonia. Brain imaging of these 2 sibs was normal. None of the 5 patients acquired walking ability, and cerebellar signs were not present.
**Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma, somatic, 133239 (3)**
Esophageal cancer, particularly esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), is one of the most common cancers worldwide. Both environmental and genetic risk factors play a role in the pathogenesis of the disorder. In Europe and North America, heavy smoking, alcohol consumption, and increased body mass index (BMI) are the main environmental risk factors. In contrast, the particularly high incidence of ESCC in some areas of China, central Asia, and southern Africa is associated with nutritional deficiencies, high intake of nitrosamine-rich or pickled vegetables, and low socioeconomic status; smoking, alcohol consumption, and BMI play a lesser role in these populations. There is a tendency for familial aggregation of ESCC in high-risk geographic areas, suggesting a genetic component to increased susceptibility. Gastric cardia adenocarcinoma is another common type of cancer in China that shows similarities to ESCC in terms of geographic distribution and environmental risk factors (summary by Wang et al., 2010 and Abnet et al., 2010).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Susceptibility to Esophageal Cancer
See a variant in the ADH1B gene (103720.0001) for discussion of a possible genetic association with protection against squamous cell aerodigestive tract cancer, including esophageal cancer, in alcohol drinkers. See a variant in the ALDH2 gene (100650.0001) for discussion of a possible genetic association with increased risk for esophageal cancer in alcohol drinkers due to interaction between variants in the ADH1B and ALDH2 genes.
See the S100A14 gene (607986) on chromosome 1q21 for a discussion of a possible association between variation in that gene and susceptibility to esophageal squamous cell carcinoma among smokers.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Somatic Mutations in Esophageal Cancer
Somatic mutations in several different genes have been found in esophageal cancer tissue. These genes include TP53 (191170), CDKN2A (600160), DEC1 (604767), DCC (120470), DLEC1 (604050), TGFBR2 (190182), LZTS1 (606551), RNF6 (604242), WWOX (605131), APC (611731), and RUNX3 (600210).
**Spinocerebellar ataxia, autosomal recessive 12, 614322 (3), AR**
Autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia-12 is a neurologic disorder characterized by onset of generalized seizures in infancy, delayed psychomotor development with mental retardation, and cerebellar ataxia. Some patients may also show spasticity (summary by Mallaret et al., 2014).
Gribaa et al. (2007) reported 4 sibs, born of consanguineous Saudi Arabian parents, with early-childhood onset of cerebellar ataxia associated with generalized seizures and delayed psychomotor development. Seizure onset occurred between 9 and 12 months. All showed gait ataxia when they achieved walking, which was delayed until 2 to 3 years of age. Other features included upper and lower limb ataxia, dysarthria, gaze-evoked nystagmus, and learning difficulties. Brain MRI of 2 patients showed mild cerebellar atrophy.
Mallaret et al. (2014) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Israeli Palestinian parents, with onset of generalized tonic-clonic seizures in the first 2 years of life. They also had mental retardation, ataxia, and prominent upper motor neuron signs with leg spasticity and extensor plantar responses.



MINPP1
**{Thyroid carcinoma, follicular}, 188470 (3), AD, Somatic mutation**
Nonmedullary thyroid cancer (NMTC) comprises thyroid cancers of follicular cell origin and accounts for more than 95% of all thyroid cancer cases. The remaining cancers originate from parafollicular cells (medullary thyroid cancer, MTC; 155240). NMTC is classified into 4 groups: papillary, follicular, Hurthle cell (607464), and anaplastic. Approximately 5% of NMTC is hereditary, occurring as a minor component of a familial cancer syndrome (e.g., familial adenomatous polyposis, 175100, Carney complex, 160980) or as a primary feature (familial NMTC or FNMTC). Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is the most common histologic subtype of FNMTC, accounting for approximately 85% of cases (summary by Vriens et al., 2009).
Follicular thyroid cancer (FTC) accounts for approximately 15% of NMTC and is defined by invasive features that result in infiltration of blood vessels and/or full penetration of the tumor capsule, in the absence of the nuclear alterations that characterize papillary carcinoma. FTC is rarely multifocal and usually does not metastasize to the regional lymph nodes but tends to spread via the bloodstream to the lung and bones. An important histologic variant of FTC is the oncocytic (Hurthle cell, oxyphilic) follicular carcinoma composed of eosinophilic cells replete with mitochondria (summary by Bonora et al., 2010).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of NMTC, see NMTC1 (188550).



MUSK
**Fetal akinesia deformation sequence 1, 208150 (3), AR**
The fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) refers to a clinically and genetically heterogeneous constellation of features including fetal akinesia, intrauterine growth retardation, arthrogryposis, and developmental anomalies, including lung hypoplasia, cleft palate, and cryptorchidism (Vogt et al., 2009). It shows phenotypic overlap with the lethal form of multiple pterygium syndrome (see 253290).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Fetal Akinesia Deformation Sequence
FADS2 (618388) is caused by mutation in the RAPSN gene (601592), FADS3 (618389) is caused by mutation in the DOK7 gene (618389), and FADS4 (618393) is caused by mutation in the NUP88 gene (602552).
As mutations in the MUSK, RAPSN, and DOK7 genes have been associated with congenital myasthenic syndromes (see, e.g., CMS1A, 601462), the disorders in these patients likely represent extreme phenotypes of CMS (Vogt et al., 2009).
Patients with Mutations in the MUSK Gene
Tan-Sindhunata et al. (2015) reported 14 affected fetuses from a Dutch genetic isolate with FADS associated with a homozygous missense mutation in the MUSK gene (see MOLECULAR GENETICS). All died in utero or shortly after birth. Clinical features included polyhydramnios, decreased fetal movements, joint contractures, and pulmonary hypoplasia. Dysmorphic features included hypertelorism, low-set ears, micrognathia, and reduced muscle bulk. All males had undescended testes, but most were born prematurely. Muscle biopsies showed myopathic features associated with denervation, such as variation in muscle fiber diameter, rounded and atrophic fibers, and internal nuclei. AChR clusters and tyrosine kinase activity at motor endplates were significantly decreased compared to controls, suggesting a defect in synaptogenesis.
Wilbe et al. (2015) reported 5 fetuses, born of Swedish parents, with FADS associated with a homozygous truncating mutation in the MUSK gene (see MOLECULAR GENETICS). All fetuses showed akinesia and joint contractures on prenatal ultrasound, and all died in utero or in the perinatal period. Autopsy confirmed muscle atrophy and multiple joint contractures. Additional features included polyhydramnios, micrognathia, low-set ears, and lung hypoplasia. Muscle biopsy showed a large variation in fiber size, fiber atrophy, and a predominance of type II fibers.
Early Reports of Patients with FADS
Pena and Shokeir (1974, 1976) described patients with a lethal congenital syndrome comprising camptodactyly, multiple ankyloses, facial anomalies, and pulmonary hypoplasia. Affected sibs born of consanguineous parents indicated autosomal recessive inheritance. Punnett et al. (1974) and Mease et al. (1976) observed cases with this sequence, and noted that the features were secondary to fetal neuromuscular dysfunction.
Chen et al. (1983) reported 5 cases, including 3 sibs. The other 2 cases had a history of affected sibs including a pair of concordant twins. In addition to multiple ankyloses, camptodactyly, facial anomalies, and pulmonary hypoplasia, one fetus had pterygia of the neck and axillae and cardiac hypoplasia. Chen et al. (1983) suggested that pterygium may be a feature of the Pena-Shokeir syndrome, and that the lethal form of a recessively inherited syndrome described by Chen et al. (1980) and Hall et al. (1982) may represent a severe form of the Pena-Shokeir syndrome.
Moerman et al. (1983) reported 2 unrelated infants who died perinatally with severe arthrogryposis multiplex congenita, pulmonary hypoplasia, and characteristic facies. They counted a total of 15 reported cases. They confirmed the suggestion of Smith (1982) that the Pena-Shokeir syndrome I is a primary motor neuropathy. Postmortem examination showed a marked paucity of anterior horn cells in the spinal cord and diffuse muscle atrophy. Pulmonary hypoplasia resulted from involvement of the respiratory muscles. In addition, both patients showed adrenal hypoplasia of the 'miniature' type; the histologic appearance was that of 'miniature' adult glands with atrophy of the fetal cortex, as seen in anencephaly. Polyhydramnios was due to impaired swallowing of amniotic fluid.
Lindhout et al. (1985) reported 9 cases in 7 sibships. The parents were consanguineous in all but 1 of the 7. Toriello et al. (1985) reported 2 female infant sibs.
Bisceglia et al. (1987) described the pathologic findings in affected male and female sibs. Hageman et al. (1987) observed a variety of brain pathology in 6 unrelated new cases and in a review of 28 previously reported cases.
Katzenstein and Goodman (1988) reported a case of survival to the age of 20 months. Out of about 60 reported cases, only 5 others surviving beyond 28 days were found.
Lammer et al. (1989) described affected brothers who were unusual because they had macrocephaly and normal intrauterine growth. Autopsy, performed only in the second sib, showed no detectable neuromuscular abnormalities underlying the contractures. Abnormalities were detected by ultrasonography during the 18th week of gestation of the second fetus.
Erdl et al. (1989) described 2 sibs with the Pena-Shokeir phenotype and major malformations of the central nervous system. The cases illustrated again the heterogeneity of this phenotype.
Gyr et al. (1992) described a consanguineous family in which 3 male sibs were affected; 2 died antepartum and the third shortly after delivery.
Chen et al. (1995) described 2 unrelated infants with fetal akinesia sequence who as newborns were noted to have multiple perinatal fractures of the long bones. Radiographs showed gracile ribs and thin long bones with multiple diaphyseal fractures. Osseous hypoplasia associated with decreased use was thought to predispose to fracture.
**Myasthenic syndrome, congenital, 9, associated with acetylcholine receptor deficiency, 616325 (3), AR**
Congenital myasthenic syndrome associated with AChR deficiency is a disorder of the postsynaptic neuromuscular junction (NMJ) clinically characterized by early-onset muscle weakness with variable severity. Electrophysiologic studies show low amplitude of the miniature endplate potential (MEPP) and current (MEPC) resulting from deficiency of AChR at the endplate. Patients may show a favorable response to amifampridine (summary by Engel et al., 2015).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of CMS, see CMS1A (601462).
Chevessier et al. (2004) reported a 27-year-old French woman with congenital myasthenic syndrome. Her similarly affected brother died at 1.5 years of age. Muscle biopsy showed dramatic pre- and postsynaptic structural abnormalities of the NMJ and severe decreases in CHRNE (100725) and MUSK expression.
Mihaylova et al. (2009) reported 5 sibs, born of consanguineous Sudanese parents, with congenital myasthenic syndrome. Between ages 1 and 3 years, all patients were noted to have ptosis and easy fatigability when walking long distances. At the time of the report, the patients ranged in age from 9 to 20 years. Features included ophthalmoparesis, mild facial weakness, Gowers sign, and proximal muscle weakness in the upper and lower limbs. One patient had a waddling gait, and 2 had lordosis. One patient experienced respiratory insufficiency at age 20.
Maselli et al. (2010) reported a 19-year-old woman with severe CMS. She had been born full-term to nonconsanguineous parents. She was hypotonic at birth, and during the first month of life, she experienced respiratory failure that required tracheotomy and mechanical ventilation. While weakness continued throughout infancy, no motor milestones were delayed. She underwent corrective surgery for patent ductus arteriosus at age 2. Respiratory infections were recurrent. She underwent surgery for severe scoliosis at age 12. Neurologic examination revealed normal cognition, bilateral ptosis, and intact external ocular movements except for mild reduction of upward gaze. She had facial, bulbar, neck, and proximal limb weakness with intact deep tendon reflexes, and required continuous respiratory support with positive airway pressure during night sleep. Intracellular microelectrode recordings and microscopy studies of the NMJ in a muscle biopsy revealed decreased MEPPs, reduced endplate size, and simplification of secondary synaptic folds, consistent with a postsynaptic deficit. consistent with additional presynaptic failure.



TBCE
**Encephalopathy, progressive, with amyotrophy and optic atrophy, 617207 (3), AR**
PEAMO is a severe autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by delayed development with hypotonia apparent in infancy and subsequent motor regression. Most affected individuals are unable to or lose the ability to sit and show distal amyotrophy and weakness of all 4 limbs. The patients are cognitively impaired and unable to speak or have severe dysarthria. Additional features include optic atrophy, thin corpus callosum, and cerebellar atrophy (summary by Sferra et al., 2016).
Sferra et al. (2016) reported 6 patients from 4 apparently unrelated families originating from the same geographic area in Italy near Naples with a similar infantile-onset neurodegenerative disorder. The patients ranged from 6 to 20 years of age. They presented between birth and 14 months of age with delayed psychomotor development and hypotonia, followed by progression of the disorder and regression of motor skills. Most lost the ability to sit and developed distal amyotrophy of all 4 limbs, with foot drop, ataxia, and spastic tetraplegia. Additional features included optic atrophy, severe dysarthria or inability to speak, and scoliosis. Cognitive impairment ranged from mild to severe. Only 1 patient had overt seizures: she developed partial seizures at age 12, which progressed to refractory seizures by age 18. Electrophysiologic and electromyographic studies in all patients were consistent with a motor neuropathy, and muscle biopsy showed denervation atrophy. Fibrillation potentials were found only in distal muscles. Brain imaging showed cerebellar atrophy and thin corpus callosum. Patients in the second decade had iron accumulation in the pallidum and substantia nigra, a pattern similar to that observed in NBIA (see, e.g., NBIA1, 234200). None of the patients had growth defects, endocrine abnormalities, or hypoparathyroidism, thus distinguishing this disorder from both HRDS and KCS1.
**Hypoparathyroidism-retardation-dysmorphism syndrome, 241410 (3), AR**
HRDS is an autosomal recessive multisystem disorder characterized by intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation, infantile-onset hypoparathyroidism that can result in severe hypocalcemic seizures, dysmorphic facial features, and developmental delay (summary by Padidela et al., 2009 and Ratbi et al., 2015).
Congenital hypoparathyroidism in association with growth and mental retardation and seizures has been reported from the Middle East in children of consanguineous parents (Sanjad et al. (1988), Richardson and Kirk, 1990; Sanjad et al., 1991; Kalam and Hafeez, 1992). The first report, an abstract, was by Sanjad et al. (1988). The syndrome is sometimes known as the Sanjad-Sakati syndrome. Richardson and Kirk (1990) described the cases of 4 boys and 4 girls with this syndrome who were the products of 7 consanguineous marriages, 2 of the patients being brothers. In the remaining 6 families, a further 4 children had affected sibs who had died in infancy. The height, weight, and head circumference scores in all 8 children were less than -2 SD from the mean for their ages. Children had identical facies with deep-set eyes, depressed nasal bridge with beaked nose, long philtrum, thin upper lip, micrognathia, and large, floppy earlobes. Medullary stenosis and other skeletal defects were found in 7 of 8 children. Reduced numbers of T-cell subsets were found in 4 of 4 tested. From Saudi Arabia, Sanjad et al. (1991) described 12 affected infants, 6 girls and 6 boys, who were seen over a 3-year period. All had severe intrauterine growth retardation and postnatal growth retardation. Symptoms had occurred in the newborn period in 9 of them. The hypocalcemia was associated with hyperphosphatemia and very low concentrations of immunoreactive parathyroid hormone. None of the babies suffered from congenital heart disease. Cell-mediated immunity, measured in 5 patients, was normal. The propositus of Richardson and Kirk (1990) was born in the United Kingdom of first-cousin parents from Qatar. The other children were described simply as being 'of Middle-Eastern origin.' Although some features suggested DiGeorge syndrome (188400) or the Kenny-Caffey syndrome (127000), the conclusion was that it indeed represents a separate entity.
Marsden et al. (1994) described an affected 5-year-old Saudi Arabian girl born of consanguineous parents. Parathyroid hormone was undetectable, although her renal response to the infused hormone was normal. Growth hormone levels remained subnormal following arginine and L-DOPA stimulation. After clonidine, the growth hormone level rose to 15 ng/ml at 120 min. Treatment with human growth hormone produced a marked increase in height and weight. Marsden et al. (1994) suggested that regulation of parathyroid hormone may be controlled by the hypothalamus.
Hershkovitz et al. (1995) described 6 children of Arab origin with the syndrome of congenital hypoparathyroidism, severe growth retardation, developmental delay, and dysmorphism (microcephaly, facial and dental anomalies, and small hands and feet). Bone age was markedly retarded. Neither immunologic nor chromosomal abnormalities were found. Serum levels of insulin-like growth factor-1 (147440) measured in 2 patients were abnormally low. In an addendum, Hershkovitz et al. (1995) stated that, during the preparation of the manuscript, another 2 patients were born, bringing to 3 the number of affected sibs in each of 2 families. Both of the newly born patients had low birth weight, dysmorphic features similar to those in the other patients, and asymptomatic hypocalcemia that appeared a few days after birth. Parental consanguinity was evident in 3 families. In the first 6 patients, 3 were female and 3 were male. It was thought that the disorder did not conform to described forms of familial hypoparathyroidism (146200 and 307700) or to DiGeorge syndrome (188400); however, the ethnicity and clinical features indicated that it is the same disorder as that reported from Saudi Arabia.
Padidela et al. (2009) reported 6 children from 4 unrelated Middle Eastern families with HRDS confirmed by genetic analysis. All were homozygous for the founder 12-bp deletion in the TBCE gene (604934.0001). Brain imaging of all children showed hypoplasia of the anterior pituitary, infundibulum, and corpus callosum, as well as decreased white matter volume, delayed myelination, and dilated lateral ventricles. Four of five children tested had low levels of growth hormone and subnormal cortisol responses to glucagon, and all 6 had low plasma IGF1 (147440). All 3 males had clinical features suggestive of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, although testosterone responses to HCG were satisfactory. Padidela et al. (2009) suggested that TBCE may play a role in development of the anterior pituitary, corpus callosum, and white matter, in addition to the parathyroid glands.
Ratbi et al. (2015) reported a female infant, born of consanguineous Moroccan parents, with HRDS. She had intrauterine growth retardation, axial hypotonia, and developed seizures associated with hypocalcemia on the second day of life. Phosphate was increased and parathyroid hormone was severely decreased. Dysmorphic features included deep-set small eyes, depressed nasal bridge with a beaked nose, long philtrum, thin upper lip, micrognathia, and large floppy earlobes. She had no cardiac or skeletal manifestations and died at age 3 months from complications of hypoparathyroidism.
**Kenny-Caffey syndrome, type 1, 244460 (3), AR**
Franceschini et al. (1992) suggested autosomal recessive inheritance of Kenny-Caffey syndrome in female and male sibs, born of normal consanguineous parents. The sister died at 10 days of age with generalized hypertonic seizures associated with hypocalcemia. The later-born brother had neonatal hypoparathyroidism; at 1 year of age, he was short but intelligent. Both infants showed characteristic cortical thickening and medullary stenosis. Franceschini et al. (1992) noted that recessive inheritance was also suggested by the parental consanguinity in a family with a single affected child (Bergada et al., 1988) and by the family with 2 affected infants with the same normal father and different normal mothers who were sisters (Sarria et al., 1980).
Khan et al. (1997) reported 16 affected children in 6 unrelated sibships, born to healthy, consanguineous parents of Bedouin ancestry. They were able to assess clinically 11 of these 16 patients. All presented with marked growth retardation, craniofacial anomalies, small hands and feet, hypocalcemia, hypoparathyroidism, radiologic evidence of cortical thickening of long bones with medullary stenosis, and absent diploic space in the skull. There was a history of 6 other affected sibs dying in infancy with hypocalcemic convulsions. All cases had early psychomotor retardation and absence of macrocephaly.



ETHE1
**Ethylmalonic encephalopathy, 602473 (3), AR**
Ethylmalonic encephalopathy is an autosomal recessive severe metabolic disorder of infancy affecting the brain, gastrointestinal tract, and peripheral vessels. The disorder is characterized by neurodevelopmental delay and regression, prominent pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs, recurrent petechiae, orthostatic acrocyanosis, and chronic diarrhea. Brain MRI shows necrotic lesions in deep gray matter structures. Death usually occurs in the first decade of life (summary by Drousiotou et al., 2011).
Burlina et al. (1991) first described ethylmalonic encephalopathy as a syndrome characterized by developmental delay, acrocyanosis, petechiae, and chronic diarrhea. Laboratory studies showed ethylmalonic and methylsuccinic aciduria and lactic acidemia. However, in vitro activities of short chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (SCAD; 606885) and 2-methyl-branched chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, 2 enzymes whose deficiencies could theoretically produce the biochemical findings observed in ethylmalonic encephalopathy, were found to be normal (Burlina et al., 1994).
Nowaczyk et al. (1998) reported the cases of 2 sibs with ethylmalonic encephalopathy and central nervous system malformations. The girl had primary tethered cord. Her younger brother, who was evaluated at the age of 4 years because of a similar phenotype (episodic ataxia, chronic diarrhea, and acrocyanosis), had cerebellar tonsillar ectopia (Chiari I malformation).
Tiranti et al. (2004) stated that since the initial report no more than 30 cases of ethylmalonic encephalopathy had been described worldwide, leading to the assumption that the disorder is very rare. However, the actual incidence of the condition may be significantly underestimated because the biochemical phenotype may be incorrectly attributed to other metabolic disorders.
Drousiotou et al. (2011) reported 3 patients from 2 unrelated families of Greek Cypriot origin with ethylmalonic encephalopathy. The first patient presented at age 2.5 months with feeding difficulties, failure to thrive, petechiae, and ecchymosis. She was floppy with severe head lag and microcephaly, and showed poor responses to auditory and visual stimuli. Deep tendon reflexes were exaggerated, and there was sustained clonus and bilateral Babinski sign. She subsequently developed chronic diarrhea and seizures. Brain MRI revealed multiple bilateral loci of high intensity in the basal ganglia on T2-weighted images. She showed neurologic regression and was 5.5 years old at the time of the report. Her older brother died at age 6 months of a presumably similar disorder. Ultrasound of the brain showed hyperechogenicity of gyri and sulci. No tissues were available for confirmation of diagnosis. A girl from a second family was born prematurely at 36 weeks' gestation and presented at age 6 months with feeding difficulties, hypotonia, and global developmental delay. She later developed diarrhea, petechiae, ecchymosis, and seizures, and brain MRI showed abnormal signals in the basal ganglia and thinning of the corpus callosum. She died at age 8 months from cardiopulmonary arrest. Laboratory studies of all 3 patients showed increased serum lactate and butyrylcarnitine, and increased urinary ethylmalonic acid, methylsuccinate, and thiosulfate. Western blot analysis from 2 patients showed complete absence of the ETHE1 protein.



BRF1
**Cerebellofaciodental syndrome, 616202 (3), AR**
Cerebellofaciodental syndrome is an autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by delayed development, intellectual disability, abnormal facial and dental findings, and cerebellar hypoplasia (summary by Borck et al., 2015).
Borck et al. (2015) reported 6 children from 3 unrelated families with a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by microcephaly (-2 to -3 SD), delayed development, and variable intellectual disability with poor speech. Two families were of Italian origin and 1 was Portuguese. All patients had similar craniofacial anomalies, including wave-shaped palpebral fissures, sparse eyebrows, sparse hair, low-set ears, dental malocclusion, and prominent upper incisors. Brain imaging showed cerebellar hypoplasia, thin corpus callosum, and enlarged ventricles. Two sibs also had a hypoplastic pons. Skull and orthopanoramic radiographs showed bialveolar protrusion, prominent alveolar processes, and taurodontism. Other features included scoliosis, short neck and trunk, slender long bones, and tapering fingers. Three patients had laryngeal stridor or laryngomalacia.



MUC1
**Medullary cystic kidney disease 1, 174000 (3), AD**
Medullary cystic kidney disease (MCKD) is an autosomal dominant form of tubulointerstitial nephropathy characterized by formation of renal cysts at the corticomedullary junction. It is characterized by adult onset of impaired renal function and salt wasting resulting in end-stage renal failure by the sixth decade (Wolf et al., 2004).
Although early reports suggested that medullary cystic kidney disease and familial juvenile nephronophthisis (NPHP1; 256100) represented the same disease entity because of the overlapping phenotype (Chamberlin et al., 1977), they are now considered to be distinct disorders. MCKD has adult onset and shows autosomal dominant inheritance, whereas NPHP1 has juvenile onset and shows autosomal recessive inheritance (Christodoulou et al., 1998). NPHP1 is caused by mutation in the nephrocystin gene (NPHP1; 607100) on chromosome 2q13.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Medullary Cystic Kidney Disease
See also MCKD2 (603860), which is caused by mutation in the UMOD gene (191845) on chromosome 16p.
Thorn et al. (1944) are credited with the first description of medullary cystic renal disease under the designation 'salt-losing nephritis.' They noted an association with red and blond hair. Rayfield and McDonald (1972) also recognized the association between medullary cystic disease and red and blond hair. Smith and Graham (1945) reported an isolated case.
Goldman et al. (1966) described a kindred with 17 affected members spanning 5 generations. Fifteen had died in the second decade of life with rapid clinical deterioration after the onset of symptoms. The kidneys showed thin cortices, prominent glomerular hyalinization, numerous corticomedullary and intramedullary cysts lined by low cuboidal epithelium, and increase in medullary connective tissue. The authors noted differences from polycystic kidney disease (see 173900), such as the absence of flank pain, and the presence of hypertension and small kidneys. Gardner (1971) reported 2 extensively affected sibships. The average age of onset of symptoms was 23 years in one and 35 years in the second. The average duration of illness was only 2.2 years. Wrigley et al. (1973) described a family with somewhat later onset of medullary cystic kidney disease. Whelton et al. (1974) reported another affected family. Giangiacomo et al. (1975) presented a family in which the onset of autosomal dominant MCKD was unusually early.
Stavrou et al. (1998) reported a large Cypriot family in which at least 23 members spanning 4 generations had interstitial nephropathy inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Ten patients were deceased. Clinical features were variable and included renal medullary cysts, hypertension, hyperuricemia, and gout. Urinalysis of 10 patients showed no hematuria, pyuria, or casts. The mean age at onset of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) was 62 years. Two renal biopsies showed interstitial fibrosis and severe tubular atrophy consistent with a primary tubulointerstitial process. There was also periglomerular fibrosis with a few sclerotic glomeruli. Linkage analysis excluded the NPHP1 locus on 2q13 and the PKD1 locus (601313) on 16p.
Ala-Mello et al. (1999) used the term 'nephronophthisis' for both the dominant disorder called medullary cystic disease and recessive juvenile nephronophthisis (NPHP1). The dominant form was characterized by later age at onset of first symptoms, at start of dialysis, and at transplantation. In a survey of 59 cases ascertained in Finland, 17 came from 4 families showing dominant inheritance and 37 came from apparently recessive families; 2 were considered new dominant mutations, and 3 sporadic cases could not be classified.
Parvari et al. (2001) studied a family of Jewish ancestry in which 15 members spanning 4 generations had chronic renal failure with onset between 18 and 38 years of age. Hypertension was often the presenting sign, followed by progressive renal insufficiency. No polyuria, anemia, gout, hematuria, or proteinuria were seen. An average of 4.5 years elapsed between diagnosis and end-stage renal disease. Renal pathology at early stages of the disease showed extensive tubulointerstitial fibrosis and global glomerulosclerosis.
Wolf et al. (2004) reported a Belgian kindred with MCKD. Age at presentation ranged from 29 to 53 years, and age at ESRD varied between 34 and 49 years. First symptoms included polyuria, polydipsia, and anemia. One patient had hypertension and 2 had hyperuricemia. Gout was not reported. Variable ultrasound findings included small kidneys and small medullary cysts.
Kiser et al. (2004) reported a large Native American kindred in which 12 living members had MCKD1 confirmed by linkage analysis. Age at onset of renal insufficiency ranged from 34 to 65 years and age at development of ESRD ranged from 35 to 66 years. No patient presented with polyuria, polydipsia, or urinary salt wasting; most presented with abnormal laboratory data obtained for other reasons. Other features included gout (61%), hypertension (55%), and anemia (39%). Ultrasound detected renal cysts in 44% of patients, and renal biopsies of 4 patients showed interstitial fibrosis, interstitial inflammation, tubular atrophy, and glomerulosclerosis. Only 2 patients had significant proteinuria on urinalysis.
Kirby et al. (2013) reported 6 unrelated families with MCKD1, including the families previously reported by Kiser et al. (2004) and Kimmel et al. (2005). Affected individuals had slowly progressive kidney dysfunction beginning in adulthood, absent or low grade proteinuria with bland urinary sediments, decreased glomerular filtration rate, and absence of other association signs or symptoms of systemic disease. Hypertension tended to occur only after onset of chronic renal failure. Hematuria was typically not present. Renal biopsies showed tubulointerstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy, and renal ultrasounds occasionally showed cortical cysts, but cysts were often not present.



FGF12
**Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 47, 617166 (3), AD**
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy-47 (DEE47) is a neurologic disorder characterized by onset of intractable seizures in the first days or weeks of life. EEG shows background slowing and multifocal epileptic spikes, and may show hypsarrhythmia. Most patients have developmental regression after seizure onset and show persistent intellectual disability and neurologic impairment, although the severity is variable. Treatment with phenytoin, a voltage-gated sodium channel blocker, may be beneficial (summary by Guella et al., 2016).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of DEE, see 308350.
Siekierska et al. (2016) reported 2 sibs, born of unrelated Caucasian parents, with early infantile epileptic encephalopathy resulting in death at ages 7 and 3.5 years. The proband developed tonic seizures at age 14 days, and her younger brother had onset of seizures at age 4 weeks. The seizures developed into severe refractory epilepsy associated with EEG abnormalities, including severe background slowing, multifocal epileptic abnormalities, and hypsarrhythmia. This was followed by severely delayed psychomotor development with profound intellectual disability, inability to stand or walk, cerebral visual impairment, feeding difficulties necessitating tube feeding, and absent speech development. Other features included acquired microcephaly, axial hypotonia, and limb ataxia. Funduscopy was normal initially, but later showed pale optic discs. Brain imaging was normal in early infancy, but later showed cerebellar atrophy. The findings were consistent with a progressive and degenerative process.
Al-Mehmadi et al. (2016) reported 3 unrelated patients with DEE47. The patients had a slightly different disease course, despite sharing the same de novo heterozygous mutation (R52H; 601513.0001). Patient 1 was a 3-year-old boy who had onset of intractable seizures on the second day of life, with frequent status epilepticus. EEG showed background slowing and multifocal discharges. He had severe global developmental delay and was nonverbal with poor visual and social interaction, hypotonia with head lag, and could only sit with support. He was tube-fed and had chronic constipation. Brain imaging was normal at onset, but showed enlarged ventricles at age 2 years. Treatment included a ketogenic diet and medications; phenytoin was not used. The second patient was a 16-year-old girl, who developed seizures at age 6 weeks, had severe cognitive impairment with single words, but showed normal motor development and could ambulate. Seizures included generalized tonic-clonic and partial seizures. She was started on phenytoin at age 6, with some improvement. Since age 7, she developed transient ataxia after seizures. Vagal nerve stimulation improved the frequency and intensity of seizures and ataxia. Brain imaging at age 16 months was normal, but showed cerebellar atrophy at age 8 years. She had chronic constipation and required help with all activities of daily living. Patient 3 was an 18-year-old girl had intractable epilepsy since day 2 of life associated with EEG abnormalities. She had moderate intellectual disability, but could read simple books and ambulate with an abnormal gait. She had chronic constipation, hypohidrosis, and reduced lacrimation, suggesting autonomic dysfunction. Brain imaging showed mesial temporal sclerosis and mild prominence of the cerebellar folia. She was treated with phenytoin and vagal nerve stimulation.
Guella et al. (2016) reported a 15-year-old girl with DEE47 who developed tonic seizures on the second day of life. EEG showed background slowing and multifocal spikes. The seizures did not respond to several medications, and she had an allergic reaction to carbamazepine; phenytoin was never used. She had developmental delay with regression at times of increased seizure frequency, moderate intellectual disability with speech delay, and autism. Brain imaging showed an incidental Chiari I malformation.
Clinical Variability
Guella et al. (2016) reported an 11-month-old girl who developed seizures on the third day of life and was found to carry a de novo heterozygous R52H mutation in the FGF12 gene. Initial interictal EEG showed multifocal spikes, and continuous EEG monitoring showed multiple seizures, including during sleep. The seizures were unresponsive to several medications at first, but she did respond to phenytoin on day 20. She had normal development and a normal neurologic examination at age 11 months. Brain imaging on day 4 of life was normal. Guella et al. (2016) noted that the phenotype in this patient was significantly milder than that observed in other patients with the same mutation.



PXDN
**Anterior segment dysgenesis 7, with sclerocornea, 269400 (3), AR**
Anterior segment dysgeneses (ASGD or ASMD) are a heterogeneous group of developmental disorders affecting the anterior segment of the eye, including the cornea, iris, lens, trabecular meshwork, and Schlemm canal. The clinical features of ASGD include iris hypoplasia, an enlarged or reduced corneal diameter, corneal vascularization and opacity, posterior embryotoxon, corectopia, polycoria, an abnormal iridocorneal angle, ectopia lentis, and anterior synechiae between the iris and posterior corneal surface (summary by Cheong et al., 2016).
In sclerocornea there is congenital, nonprogressive corneal opacification that may be peripheral, sectoral, or central in location. Visual prognosis is related to the central corneal involvement. The cornea has a flat curvature. The majority of cases are bilateral (summary by Smith and Traboulsi, 2012).
Isolated sclerocornea is caused by displacement of the limbal arcades and may be associated with cornea plana; in this condition, the anterior chamber is visible and the eye is not microphthalmic. In complex sclerocornea, however, corneal opacification is associated with microphthalmia, cataract, and/or infantile glaucoma. The central cornea is usually relatively clear, but the thickness is normal or increased, never reduced (summary by Nischal, 2007).
Khan et al. (2011) studied a consanguineous Pakistani family (family MEP60) segregating autosomal recessive cataract, microcornea, and corneal opacity, which the authors designated CCMCO. The 3 affected family members exhibited corneas that were 7 to 8 mm in diameter, and anterior segment examination showed that the peripherally located corneal opacity appeared to be due to the sclera encroaching on the cornea. Peripheral iridocorneal adhesion was also present. Vision was reduced to counting fingers in all 3 patients. The family history suggested that the changes were not progressive.
Khan et al. (2011) reported a large consanguineous Pakistani family (family MEP59) in which 4 sibs and 2 cousins had corneal opacification as well as cataract and microcornea. The lens was of normal size and shape, and the fundus was normal by indirect ophthalmoscopy. Khan et al. (2011) also described a consanguineous Cambodian family (family CA2) with 4 affected sibs who had severe corneal opacification, 3 of whom also had bilateral buphthalmos and exhibited severe vascularization of the cornea. Elevated intraocular pressures were present in 3 of the sibs, including the patient without buphthalmos. The extent of corneal opacification prevented visualization of the anterior chamber or fundus, and the presence or absence of cataract could not be determined.
Choi et al. (2015) reported 3 children from 2 families with mutations in the PXDN gene. In 1 family, a brother and sister both had sclerocornea, microphthalmia, and anterior segment dysgenesis. The brother had bilateral sclerocornea and microphthalmia with iridocorneal dysgenesis and glaucoma. The right eye was more severely affected than the left. His younger sister had bilateral sclerocornea, right microphthalmia, and anterior segment dysgenesis. In addition, both sibs had hypotonia and motor delays. Choi et al. (2015) also reported an unrelated boy who had a bilateral cataract that was smaller on the right side than the left, as well as bilateral anterior segment dysgenesis and left microphthalmia. He had normal psychomotor development at age 3.3 years; brain MRI was unremarkable.



ATAD3A
**Harel-Yoon syndrome, 617183 (3), AR, AD**
Harel-Yoon syndrome is a syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by delayed psychomotor development, intellectual disability, truncal hypotonia, spasticity, and peripheral neuropathy. Other more variable features such as optic atrophy may also occur. Laboratory studies in some patients show evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction (summary by Harel et al., 2016).
Harel et al. (2016) reported 5 unrelated children ranging from 23 months to 9 years of age with a syndromic neurodevelopmental disorder. All had severely delayed psychomotor development with intellectual disability and poor or absent speech. The patients had truncal hypotonia, and all except the youngest showed appendicular spasticity and peripheral axonal neuropathy with atrophy of the lower limb muscles. Only the 9-year-old patient could walk, and she had a spastic crouched gait. Two patients had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and 3 had optic atrophy. None had seizures. Additional variable features included poor feeding, sleep difficulties, myopia, nystagmus, and esotropia. Some patients had skeletal anomalies, such as pectus carinatum, scoliosis, hip dysplasia, or foot deformities. Some patients had dysmorphic features, including high forehead, small nose, deep-set eyes, and micrognathia, but there was not a common pattern. Three patients had evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction, including increased serum lactate, deficiencies of mitochondrial respiratory enzymes, and methylglutaconic aciduria.
Clinical Variability
Harel et al. (2016) reported 2 adult sibs, born of distantly related Italian parents, with a complex neurologic disorder consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. The patients had delayed development since infancy, language delay, hypotonia, congenital cataracts, and ataxic gait. One had mild intellectual disability. Dysmorphic facial features included long face, triangular nose, and prognathia with a prominent chin. Both patients developed absence seizures around 6 to 7 years of age. Other features included mildly delayed puberty and delayed bone age. Brain imaging showed progressive cerebellar atrophy and hypoplastic optic nerves. Mitochondrial respiratory chain enzyme analysis in muscle and fibroblasts showed normal activities. Whole-exome sequencing identified a homozygous missense variant in the ATAD3A gene (T53I; 612316.0002); functional studies of the variant were not performed. Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for the mutation. See also autosomal recessive chromosome 1p36.33 deletion syndrome (618810).



PGAP1
**Mental retardation, autosomal recessive 42, 615802 (3), AR**
Autosomal recessive mental retardation-42 is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by severely delayed psychomotor development. Additional features are variable and include nonspecific dysmorphic facial features, hypotonia, structural brain abnormalities, and cortical visual impairment (summary by Bosch et al., 2015). The disorder is caused by a defect in glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) biosynthesis.
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of GPI biosynthesis defects, see GPIBD1 (610293).
Murakami et al. (2014) reported a highly consanguineous Syrian family (MR079) in which 2 sibs had intellectual disability. The children were 4 and almost 3 years of age at the time of the report. Both had neonatal hypotonia and severely delayed psychomotor development (IQ below 35) with some stereotypic movements. One had both major and absence epilepsy. Brain CT scan of 1 patient showed pronounced brain atrophy. Other features included large ears and flattened nasal root.
Novarino et al. (2014) identified a consanguineous family (family 1241) in which 2 sibs had autosomal recessive MRT42. The patients were ascertained from a larger cohort of patients with spastic paraplegia. The brothers, aged 9 months and 6 years, had global developmental delay, hand and foot tremors, and spasticity. The older brother could walk with support. Both had increased deep tendon reflexes. The older brother had prominent cortical sulci and widened sylvian fissures; the younger brother had agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, and defective myelination. The older brother had borderline intelligence. The ethnicity of the family was not provided.
Williams et al. (2015) reported a 3-year-old boy, born of unrelated parents, with delayed psychomotor development apparent since birth, delayed language, hypotonia with inability to crawl or walk, and cortical visual impairment. He also had dyskinetic movements and required a feeding tube, but had no seizures. Mild dysmorphic features included small head, prominent forehead, high-arched eyebrows, large mouth with abnormal teeth, short neck, and abnormal hand morphology. Brain imaging showed thinning of the corpus callosum, diffuse volume loss, delayed myelination, and signal abnormalities in the central tegmental tracts of the pons.
Bosch et al. (2015) reported an 8-year-old boy with delayed psychomotor development, poor speech, hypotonia, and cortical visual impairment. Dysmorphic features included upslanting palpebral fissures, deep-set eyes, strabismus, nystagmus, large abnormal earlobes, and tooth abnormalities. Brain imaging was normal and he had no evidence of seizures. The patient also had factor XII deficiency (234000) associated with a heterozygous truncating mutation in the F12 gene (610619) that was inherited from his father who had normal factor XII activity; thus, the significance of this finding was unclear.
Granzow et al. (2015) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, with MRT42. They showed global developmental delay with absent speech, short stature, axial hypotonia, hypertonia, and mild dysmorphic features. In addition, both showed abnormal electroretinograms consistent with retinal dystrophy. Brain imaging was normal.



CRYAA
**Cataract 9, multiple types, 604219 (3), AR, AD**
Mutations in the CRYAA gene have been found to cause multiple types of cataract, which have been described as nuclear, zonular central nuclear, laminar, lamellar, anterior polar, posterior polar, cortical, embryonal, anterior subcapsular, fan-shaped, and total. Cataract associated with microcornea, sometimes called the cataract-microcornea syndrome, is also caused by mutation in the CRYAA gene. Both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive modes of inheritance have been reported. The symbol CATC1 was formerly used for the autosomal recessive form of cataract caused by mutation in the CRYAA gene.
Litt et al. (1998) studied a 4-generation family with autosomal dominant congenital cataracts that had been described as congenital zonular central nuclear opacities. In 5 of the 13 affected family members, the cataracts were also associated with microphthalmia and microcornea. As adults in their thirties, patients developed cortical and posterior subcapsular cataracts as well. The time of surgery had varied from infancy to late childhood. Visual acuity following surgery had been as good as 20/40 in older adults, but several patients had poor vision in each eye associated with nystagmus. Other sequelae common in this family included amblyopia, strabismus, and glaucoma.
Pras et al. (2000) reported 3 sibs from an inbred Jewish Persian family with autosomal recessive congenital cataract. The patients underwent cataract extraction in the first 3 months of life, and no details of the pathologic findings in the lens were available.
Mackay et al. (2003) described a 4-generation Caucasian family segregating an autosomal dominant form of 'nuclear' cataract presenting at birth or during infancy and confined to the central zone or fetal nucleus of the lens. Haplotype analysis indicated that the disease gene lay in the physical interval between 2 markers flanking the CRYAA gene.
Shafie et al. (2006) examined affected members of 4 Chilean families segregating autosomal dominant cataract and found significant intrafamilial variation with respect to morphology, location within the lens, color, and density. In family 'ADC51,' affected members had cataracts in variable locations within the lens and of different densities; the authors documented interocular asymmetry of density and location and progression. The cataracts included nuclear opacities, posterior subcapsular cataracts, and combinations, and 1 individual had a dense white cataract. Two sisters in family 'ADC52' demonstrated differences in morphology and location of cataract. In family 'ADC53,' there were differences in cataract location, density of similar and disparate opacities, morphology, and color among affected members, but morphology and density were the same in each eye. Cataracts included embryonal cataract of varying densities, pulverulent cortical opacities, posterior star-shaped subcapsular cataract with pulverulent opacities in the cortical or embryonal regions, and dense embryonal cataracts. Some individuals described progression, although this was not documented by the authors. Members of family 'ADC54' exhibited significant variability in the morphology and density of the cataracts; 1 individual had interocular differences in the color of opacities. Shafie et al. (2006) concluded that significant intrafamilial variability in cataract morphology and location within the lens is common in autosomal dominant cataract.
Vanita et al. (2006) examined 10 affected and 9 unaffected members of a large 4-generation family of Indian origin segregating autosomal dominant congenital cataract and microcornea. The bilateral fan-shaped cataracts were visible at birth and consisted of a round, oval, or triangular opacity with irregular margins, approximately 3 mm wide, topped by triangular opacities oriented with the base towards the periphery. In a 6-year-old patient, the base of 1 of the triangular opacities coincided with the edge of the fetal nucleus, whereas the 4 other triangular opacities extended beyond the edge of the fetal nucleus. All affected individuals also had microcornea, with corneas that were less than 10 mm in diameter. There were no other ocular abnormalities detected in this family; in particular, no posterior capsular, polar, or cortical opacities were observed in any of the affected individuals.
Santhiya et al. (2006) described a 24-year-old Indian woman who had decreasing vision beginning at age 17 and who was found to have total opacity on slit-lamp examination, with severe loss of vision. There were no other associated ocular anomalies of the anterior or posterior segment. Her mother had undergone cataract surgery at age 35 years. Her 16-year-old brother denied any vision problems, but slit-lamp examination revealed a peripheral ring-like opacity; he later reported difficulty with distance vision.
Beby et al. (2007) reported 12 affected members of a 4-generation French family with autosomal dominant cataract and iris coloboma. All affected individuals had bilateral early-onset cataract, either present at birth or developing during the first years of life, consisting of a single dense axial opacity of 3 mm confined to the embryonic and fetal nuclei of the lens and associated with bilateral iris coloboma in all patients. Two affected individuals also had congenital microphthalmia. No dysmorphic features, mental retardation, or developmental malformations were observed.
Khan et al. (2007) studied a consanguineous Saudi Arabian family in which 2 sisters and a brother had congenital total white cataract and microcornea, with horizontal corneal diameters of approximately 8 mm at 2 years of age. Two of the 3 affected sibs developed bilateral aphakic glaucoma within a few years of cataract surgery. Their parents and 7 sibs were asymptomatic, but a cousin was reported to have a similar phenotype. None of the 3 affected sibs had any other significant medical history, and all other members of the nuclear family had normal vision and no ocular or systemic disease.
Laurie et al. (2013) described a 3-generation South Australian family with lamellar cataract of variable severity. The proband was diagnosed at 2 years of age with moderate fetal nuclear lamellar cataract with no sutural involvement. His brother was diagnosed at 4.5 years of age with a more severe phenotype, described as dense white nuclear cataract. Their asymptomatic mother, maternal uncle, and maternal grandfather all displayed mild lamellar opacity consisting of fine white dots in a single lamellar shell; the uncle also had a cortical rider. These opacities did not affect visual acuity and were only discovered on examination following the children's diagnosis. The proband's 2 younger sisters had no sign of cataract.



VPS53
**Pontocerebellar hypoplasia, type 2E, 615851 (3), AR**
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 2E is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by profound mental retardation, progressive microcephaly, spasticity, and early-onset epilepsy (summary by Feinstein et al., 2014).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 2, see PCH2A (277470).
Feinstein et al. (2014) reported 10 individuals from 4 nonconsanguineous families of Jewish Moroccan descent with a severe neurodevelopmental disorder. Two of the families had previously been reported by Ben-Zeev et al. (2003). The patients were noted to have mild hypotonia and irritability in the first months of life, but psychomotor retardation did not become apparent until 3 to 5 months of age. The patients had normal head circumference at birth, but showed progressive deceleration, resulting in microcephaly by age 18 months. All developed progressive spastic quadriplegia with opisthotonic posturing and severe multifocal contractures. Generalized and myoclonic seizures began around ages 2 to 2.5 years. Other features included a sleep disorder, short stature, osteoporosis, and scoliosis. Brain imaging showed progressive diffuse cerebellar atrophy as early as 11 months of age, followed by cerebral atrophy and thin corpus callosum. All had profound mental retardation and gained almost no developmental milestones except visual tracking and smiling.
Hady-Cohen et al. (2018) reported another nonconsanguineous family of Jewish Moroccan descent in which 2 sibs had PCH2E. The patients, an older sister who was 14 years old and her younger brother who was 11 at the time of the report, had profound global developmental delay with inability to sit independently, little spontaneous movement, spasticity, joint contractures, early-onset myoclonic and tonic seizures, and absent speech. EEG studies in the sister showed hypsarrhythmia, and both had slow background with multifocal epileptic activity during wake and sleep. They had failure to thrive with poor overall growth and microcephaly (about -4 SD). The sister had optic atrophy and gaze-evoked nystagmus; the brother had no visual focus or tracking and abnormal visual evoked potentials. Dysmorphic features included bitemporal narrowing, micrognathia, short and wide nose, prominent earlobes, epicanthal folds, strabismus, and facial and limb edema. Brain imaging showed progressive and severe cerebellar and cerebral atrophy. Hady-Cohen et al. (2018) noted the phenotypic similarities to PEHO (260565).



DAG1
**Muscular dystrophy-dystroglycanopathy (congenital with brain and eye anomalies), type A, 9, 616538 (3), AR**
Congenital muscular dystrophy-dystroglycanopathy with brain and eye anomalies (type A) is an autosomal recessive disorder with characteristic brain and eye malformations, profound mental retardation, and congenital muscular dystrophy. The phenotype includes the alternative clinical designation Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS), which is associated with death in infancy. The disorder represents the most severe end of a phenotypic spectrum of similar disorders resulting from defective glycosylation of alpha-dystroglycan (DAG1), collectively known as 'dystroglycanopathies' (summary by Geis et al., 2013 and Riemersma et al., 2015).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of muscular dystrophy-dystroglycanopathy type A, see MDDGA1 (236670).
Geis et al. (2013) reported sisters, born of presumably unrelated Libyan parents, with apparent onset of severe developmental delay and hypotonia at age 4 months. Examination at ages 2 years 8 months and 3 years 7 months, respectively, showed severe mental retardation and muscular hypotonia without any ability to sit or walk. While there was a lack of head control in the younger girl, the other sib had gained some limited ability to balance the head. Neither girl was able to speak. Ophthalmic examinations revealed several abnormalities, including cataract, retinal dystrophy, severe myopia, and buphthalmos. Serum creatine kinase was increased, and muscle biopsy showed a dystrophic myopathy with moderate fiber size variability and absence of immunostaining for alpha-dystroglycan. Brain imaging performed in 1 of the patients showed multiple abnormalities consistent with muscle-eye-brain disease: there was flattening and kinking of the pons and brainstem, hypoplastic cerebellar vermis, subcortical cysts in the cerebellar hemispheres, polymicrogyria with frontal agyria, ventricular dilatation, and thinning of the corpus callosum. In addition, there were severe white matter abnormalities with T2-weighted hyperintensities and multiple large cystic lesions in a somewhat radial orientation from the frontal to parietal subcortical regions and well as smaller subcortical cysts in an anterior-temporal distribution.
Riemersma et al. (2015) reported a consanguineous Israeli-Arab family in which 5 female infants were born with multiple severe abnormalities consistent with WWS and died within a few hours to 3.5 months of life. Features included hydrocephalus, eye anomalies such as microphthalmia, buphthalmos, corneal opacities, and glaucoma, hypotonia with absent reflexes and lack of spontaneous movements, and respiratory failure. One patient had holoprosencephaly. Two patients had increased serum creatine kinase, and muscle biopsy of 1 patient showed marked variation in fiber size. Brain imaging in 3 patients showed scattered intracranial calcifications, but intrauterine infections were excluded.
**Muscular dystrophy-dystroglycanopathy (limb-girdle), type C, 9, 613818 (3), AR**
MDDGC9 is an autosomal recessive muscular dystrophy showing onset in early childhood. It is part of a group of similar disorders resulting from defective glycosylation of DAG1, collectively known as 'dystroglycanopathies' (summary by Hara et al., 2011).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of muscular dystrophy-dystroglycanopathy type C, see MDDGC1 (609308).
Dincer et al. (2003) reported a 16-year-old Turkish girl with autosomal recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy and severe mental retardation. She had delayed motor development and achieved walking at age 3 years, but showed unsteady gait and difficulties climbing stairs, which progressed to a waddling gait with Gowers sign. She had mild enlargement of the calves, ankle contractures, and increased lumbar lordosis. At age 16, she used only 2-word sentences and had an IQ of 50. Laboratory studies showed increased serum creatine kinase; brain MRI was normal. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed dystrophic changes and decreased labeling for glycosylated alpha-dystroglycan.
Clinical Variability
Dong et al. (2015) reported a 7-year-old boy, born of unrelated Japanese parents, with a very mild form of muscular dystrophy manifest only as asymptomatic increased serum creatine kinase. The patient was found to have increased serum creatine kinase incidentally during an episode of tonsillitis. He had no symptomatic muscle weakness, but did have calf pseudohypertrophy. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed features of muscular dystrophy, including regenerating fibers, internal nuclei, and mild endomysial fibrosis. There was negative staining with an antibody for the glycoepitope of DAG1, and Western blot analysis showed decreased glycosylation of alpha-dystroglycan compared to controls.



ABHD12
**Polyneuropathy, hearing loss, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa, and cataract, 612674 (3), AR**
Fiskerstrand et al. (2009) reported a consanguineous Norwegian family in which 3 individuals had a slowly progressive neurologic disorder resembling the clinical features of Refsum disease (266500). The authors suggested naming the disorder PHARC, an acronym that describes the major features of the disorder. Features in childhood included pes cavus and Achilles tendon contractures; 1 had poor hearing in childhood. Hearing loss and visual problems related to cataracts developed in the third decade. Two patients had evidence of retinitis pigmentosa, whereas the third had borderline normal electroretinogram results. All patients developed ataxic and/or spastic gait disturbances with a progressive sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy. Other features included hyporeflexia, hyperreflexia, extensor plantar responses, and neurogenic changes on EMG. Nerve conduction velocities were decreased, indicating a demyelinating neuropathy. MRI showed minor cerebellar atrophy in 1 patient. Cognition was not affected. Biochemical studies showed normal serum phytanic and pristanic acid levels, as well as normal alpha-oxidation enzymatic activity, thus excluding Refsum disease. The family originated from a small island community, and genealogic studies showed that both sets of parents were descendants of a man born in 1585.
Fiskerstrand et al. (2010) reported 19 persons from 9 families from Norway, United Arab Emirates, United States, and Algeria, with PHARC. The phenotype in general was slowly progressive, with symptom recognition in the teens, and full expression apparent only in adulthood. The Norwegian patients tended to have onset of peripheral neuropathy in adulthood, although many had pes cavus, decreased sensation, and sensorineural hearing loss from childhood. Hearing loss occurred in childhood or teenage years in 4 and in the third or fourth decade in 4. Retinitis pigmentosa and cataracts developed in adulthood. Frank ataxia was variable and also showed a later onset. In the Emirati family, 2 patients were in their twenties, and 1 was age 6 years. Common features included absent tendon reflexes, hearing loss, ataxia, cataracts; and hearing loss occurred in childhood in all 3. Only the older 2 patients had retinitis pigmentosa. There were 7 affected individuals from 4 Algerian families. The patients ranged in age from 10 to 44 years. The older individuals were more severely affected. All patients had some evidence of a polyneuropathy, with hyporeflexia, pes cavus, and/or sensory loss, and most had gait ataxia with onset in the childhood. Four of the older patients had hearing loss, but only 1 had retinitis pigmentosa and cataract. Other common features included extensor plantar responses and cerebellar atrophy. A 50-year-old woman from the U.S., who was of French Canadian origin, developed sensorineural hearing loss at age 17 years, ataxia and dysarthria at 18, and retinitis pigmentosa and cataracts in her twenties. She had pes cavus and hammertoes, and a mild peripheral neuropathy at when examined at age 34 years. She had myoclonic seizures, but cognition was not affected, and the disease showed a slowly progressive course. None of the patients had deficits of cerebral cortical function, although 1 Algerian patient was mentally retarded.
Clinical Variability
Nishiguchi et al. (2014) studied 3 families with mutations in the ABHD12 gene (see MOLECULAR GENETICS) in which the initial diagnosis was nonsyndromic autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (RP; see 268000). All affected individuals were symptom-free in the first 2 decades of life and presented with night blindness followed by central visual field loss and reduction of visual acuity; posterior subcapsular cataract was also observed in all of the patients. One proband was a 34-year-old Dutch man who did not report any neurologic symptoms but in whom a detailed examination revealed a wide-based gait, peripheral sensitivity loss in the lower extremities, and decreased tendon reflexes. Signs of ataxia included stuttering speech, an ataxic heel-knee sign, and intentional tremor with the finger-to-nose test. Audiography revealed significantly decreased sensitivity to frequencies higher than 1500 Hz to levels of 40 dB or lower in both ears. Another proband, a 38-year-old Spanish woman, was found to have bilateral hearing loss; in addition, electroneurographic study was consistent with a moderate demyelinating sensorimotor polyneuropathy in the upper and lower limbs, and MRI revealed cerebral and cerebellar atrophy. In the third family, 4 Spanish sibs ranging in age from 66 to 78 years had RP, posterior subcapsular cataract, and sensorineural hearing loss. However, examination revealed no polyneuropathy or ataxia, and their sensorineural hearing loss and cataract were attributed to either age or the normal course of RP. Nishiguchi et al. (2014) suggested that this family expanded the spectrum of phenotypes associated with ABHD12 mutations to include a nonsyndromic form of retinal degeneration.



VANGL1
**Caudal regression syndrome, 600145 (3), AD**
Sacral defect with anterior meningocele (SDAM) is a form of caudal dysgenesis. It is present at birth and becomes symptomatic later in life, usually because of obstructive labor in females, chronic constipation, or meningitis. Inheritance is autosomal dominant (Chatkupt et al., 1994). Welch and Aterman (1984) gave a population frequency of 0.14%.
Caudal dysgenesis syndrome and caudal regression syndrome are broad terms that refer to a heterogeneous constellation of congenital caudal anomalies affecting the caudal spine and spinal cord, the hindgut, the urogenital system, and the lower limbs. Approximately 15 to 25% of mothers of children with caudal dysgenesis have insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (222100) (Lynch et al., 2000).
See also Currarino syndrome (176450), a similar disorder caused by mutation in the HLXB9 gene (142994) on chromosome 7q36. Currarino syndrome classically comprises the triad of hemisacrum, anorectal malformation, and presacral mass. However, Currarino syndrome also shows phenotypic variability: Lynch et al. (2000) stated that there is variable expressivity of clinical features and that some patients with Currarino syndrome are asymptomatic. Kochling et al. (2001) found the complete triad of Currarino syndrome in only 8 of 23 patients with mutations in the HLXB9 gene, These reports suggest that some patients previously reported as having forms of sacral agenesis, including SDAM, may have had Currarino syndrome and vice versa.
See also spina bifida (182940), which can be seen in some patients with sacral agenesis or caudal regression syndrome and may be etiologically related.
Cohn and Bay-Nielsen (1969) described 7 females with anterior sacral meningocele and partial absence of the sacrum and coccyx. Symptoms included constipation and urinary incontinence. As 1 unaffected female appeared to have transmitted the disorder, the authors suggested X-linked dominant inheritance. Fellous et al. (1982) suggested autosomal dominant inheritance in the kindred reported by Cohn and Bay-Nielsen (1969). Welch and Aterman (1984) emphasized that the affected members of the kindred reported by Cohn and Bay-Nielsen (1969) had some degree of unilateral hemisacrum, and that there were no instances of surviving infants with sacral agenesis and no stillbirths. Welch and Aterman (1984) also suggested autosomal dominant inheritance in that family.
Thierry et al. (1969) reported 5 affected males and 6 affected females. Aaronson (1970) reported 2 brothers and a sister with anterior sacral meningocele, anal canal duplication cysts, and covered anus. Kenefick (1973) reported a family in which 6 females and 3 males spanning 4 generations had sacral agenesis associated with anterior sacral meningocele. Klenerman and Merrick (1973) reported anterior sacral meningocele in a woman, her father, and uncle. Say and Coldwell (1975) described the same anomaly in mother and 2 daughters.
Thierry et al. (1969) and Gardner and Albright (2006) noted that the apparent female preponderance of sacral defect with anterior sacral meningocele may reflect ascertainment bias due to increased abdominal and vaginal examinations and to the gynecologic and obstetrical complications of the condition.
Sacral agenesis and caudal regression syndrome may be attributed to maternal diabetes (Passarge and Lenz, 1966). Stewart and Stoll (1979) reported a family in which a diabetic woman gave birth to an affected girl and boy. Welch and Aterman (1984) suggested that caudal dysplasia due to maternal diabetes should be distinguished from familial forms of sacral dysgenesis.
Finer et al. (1978) reported 2 male sibs with several congenital anomalies suggestive of the VATER association (192350) with prominent features of a caudal regression syndrome. The older infant had multiple cardiac abnormalities, including transposition of the great arteries and ventricular septal defect. Other features included imperforate anus, dislocated left hip, malformed sacrum, and hypoplasia of the lumbar vertebrae. The younger sib had suspected ventricular septal defect or patent ductus arteriosus, situs inversus of the abdominal viscera, hypoplasia of the lower limbs and pelvis, and absence of the sacrum and lower lumbar spine.
Fellous et al. (1982) reported a 5-generation family with sacral agenesis and spina bifida. Abnormalities ranged from complete absence of the sacrum, with or without spina bifida aperta, to spina bifida occulta. Although many patients had isolated sacral agenesis, all those with spina bifida aperta had sacral agenesis. The condition appeared in a man with 4 children who were all affected, and thereafter, to varying degrees, in 17 of his 28 descendants. The authors suggested autosomal dominant inheritance.
Chatkupt et al. (1994) reported a 5-generation family in which 17 members had hemisacral defect with or without anterior meningocele. Inheritance was clearly autosomal dominant. One individual had only spina bifida occulta.
Welch and Aterman (1984) classified congenital sacral anomalies into 4 distinct clinical types: (1) a nonfamilial type associated with maternal diabetes showing complete absence of the sacrum and lower vertebrae and multiple congenital anomalies; (2) agenesis of the distal sacral or coccygeal segments; (3) hemisacral dysgenesis with presacral teratoma; and (4) hemisacral dysgenesis with anterior meningocele. Autosomal dominant inheritance was suggested for the latter 3 types. Cama et al. (1996) delineated 5 categories of sacral agenesis: (1) total sacral agenesis with some lumbar vertebrae missing; (2) total sacral agenesis without involvement of lumbar vertebrae; (3) subtotal sacral agenesis or sacral hypodevelopment; (4) hemisacrum; and (5) coccygeal agenesis (Belloni et al., 2000).
Andersen et al. (1990) reported a family in which 5 members had anterior sacral meningoceles inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
Gardner and Albright (2006) reported a mother and son with hemisacral defect and anterior meningocele. The child had associated lipoma, dermoid cyst, tethering of the spinal cord, and a syrinx in the conus. Although he had chronic constipation, he had no anorectal abnormalities.
Duesterhoeft et al. (2007) reported 5 patients with caudal regression syndrome associated with an abdominal umbilical artery arising from the abdominal aorta inferior to the superior mesenteric artery. Additional variable features included sacral hypoplasia, urogenital anomalies, and gastrointestinal anomalies. One patient had a phenotype consistent with VACTERL (see 192350). Although none had fusion of the lower extremities, also known as sirenomelia, 3 had asymmetric lower limb defects including 2 with fibular agenesis. The authors noted that there has been controversy in the literature regarding the relationship between caudal regression syndrome and sirenomelia. Based on their observations, Duesterhoeft et al. (2007) concluded that sirenomelia and caudal regression syndrome are part of a pathogenetic spectrum resulting from a primary deficiency of caudal embryonic mesoderm.
**{Neural tube defects, susceptibility to}, 182940 (3), AD**
Neural tube defects are the second most common type of birth defect after congenital heart defects. The 2 most common NTDs are open spina bifida, also known as spina bifida cystica (SBC) or myelomeningocele, and anencephaly (206500) (Detrait et al., 2005). Spina bifida occulta (SBO), a bony defect of the spine covered by normal skin, is a mild form of spina bifida that is often asymptomatic. The term 'spinal dysraphia' refers to both SBC and SBO (Botto et al., 1999; Fineman et al., 1982). The most severe neural tube defect, craniorachischisis (CRN), leaves the neural tube open from the midbrain or rostral hindbrain to the base of the spine (summary by Robinson et al., 2012).
Neural tube defects represent a complex trait with multifactorial etiology encompassing both genetic and environmental components (summary by Bartsch et al., 2012 and Lei et al., 2014).
An X-linked form of spina bifida has been suggested; see 301410. See also folate-sensitive neural tube defects (601634), which are caused by genes involved in folate metabolism.
Fineman et al. (1982) studied 4 families in which multiple members had spina bifida cystica and/or spina bifida occulta. Excluding the probands, the frequency of all types of spinal/vertebral defects in family members was found to be 30/58 (52%). Statistical analysis indicated autosomal dominant inheritance with a penetrance of 75%. The authors concluded that both forms of spina bifida are different expressions of the same dominant gene in these kindreds. Spina bifida occulta was present in 15% of 100 control individuals.
Fellous et al. (1982) reported a 5-generation family with spina bifida associated with sacral agenesis (see 600145). Abnormalities ranged from complete absence of the sacrum, with or without spina bifida aperta, to spina bifida occulta. The condition appeared in a man with 4 children who were all affected, and thereafter, to varying degrees, in 17 of his 28 descendants. The authors suggested autosomal dominant inheritance. Linkage analysis suggested a locus on chromosome 6 loci near PGM3 (172100) (lod score = 1.85 at a recombination fraction of 0.087).
Nickel et al. (1994) reported 3 unrelated patients with 22q11 deletion syndrome, 2 with VCFS (192430) and 1 with DiGeorge syndrome (188400), who also had neural tube defects. However, in a follow-up study of 295 patients with spina bifida, Nickel and Magenis (1996) concluded that 22q11 deletion is an infrequent cause of NTD.
Reviews
Botto et al. (1999) and Detrait et al. (2005) provided reviews of neural tube defects. De Marco et al. (2006) provided a detailed review of neurulation and the possible etiologies of neural tube defects.



FLT4
**Hemangioma, capillary infantile, somatic, 602089 (3)**
Capillary hemangiomas are benign, highly proliferative lesions involving aberrant localized growth of capillary endothelium. They are the most common tumor of infancy, occurring in up to 10% of all births (Mulliken and Young, 1988). Hemangiomas tend to appear shortly after birth and show rapid neonatal growth for up to 12 months characterized by endothelial hypercellularity and increased numbers of mast cells. This phase is followed by slow involution at a rate of about 10% per year and replacement by fibrofatty stroma. Hemangiomas are classified as distinct from vascular malformations (see, e.g., CMC1, 163000; 108010; and CCM, 116860), in that the latter are present from birth, tend to grow with the individual, do not regress, and show normal rates of endothelial cell turnover (Spring and Bentz, 2005; Legiehn and Heran, 2006). Legiehn and Heran (2006) noted that the term 'hemangioma' in adults is considered inaccurate and should be discarded.
Most hemangiomas occur sporadically, but some families with autosomal dominant inheritance have been reported (Walter et al., 1999).
Walter et al. (1997, 1999) reported 5 families in which individuals had capillary hemangiomas; 3 families had affected individuals spanning 3 generations. Hemangiomas were defined as lesions that were present at birth or shortly thereafter, displayed a proliferative growth phase, and showed evidence of regression subsequent to infancy.
Waner et al. (2003) mapped sites of occurrence of 232 facial infantile hemangiomas in 205 patients and correlated these with the pattern of tumor growth, clinical complications, and proximity to structural and developmental landmarks. Two patterns of tumor growth were evident among the hemangiomas analyzed: focal (177 lesions, or 76.3%) and diffuse (55 lesions, or 23.7%). The focal hemangiomas mapped to 22 sites of occurrence, all near lines of mesenchymal or mesenchymal-ectodermal embryonic fusion. The 55 diffuse hemangiomas showed a segmental tissue distribution and thus were designated as frontonasal (15 lesions, 27%), maxillary (19 lesions, 35%), or mandibular (21 lesions, 38%). Ulceration was 3 times more common in patients with diffuse hemangiomas (21 of 41, 51%) than in patients with focal hemangiomas (28 of 164, 17%). Airway obstruction was characteristic of diffuse mandibular hemangiomas. Waner et al. (2003) concluded that facial infantile hemangiomas occur in 2 distinct patterns of tissue involvement: a focal type with a tumor-like appearance and a less common diffuse type with a plaque-like appearance. The diffuse lesions are more likely to be complicated by ulceration or airway obstruction and show a strikingly segmental distribution pattern. Focal hemangiomas, in contrast, show a predilection for regions of embryologic fusion.
**Lymphatic malformation 1, 153100 (3), AD**
Primary lymphedema is caused by anatomic or functional defects in the lymphatic system, resulting in chronic swelling of body parts. There may be accompanying nail and skin changes, such as nail dysplasia or papillomatosis. Onset is usually at birth or in early childhood but can occur later, and the severity is variable (summary by Gordon et al., 2013 and Balboa-Beltran et al., 2014).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Lymphatic Malformation
Primary lymphedema is genetically heterogeneous: see also LMPHM2 (611944), which maps to chromosome 6q16.2-q22.1; LMPHM3 (613480), caused by mutation in the GJC2 gene (608803) on chromosome 1q42; LMPHM4 (615907), caused by mutation in the VEGFC gene (601528) on chromosome 4q34; LMPHM5 (153200); LMPHM6 (616843), caused by mutation in the PIEZO1 gene (611184) on chromosome 16q24; LMPHM7 (617300), caused by mutation in the EPHB4 gene (600011) on chromosome 7q22; and LMPHM8 (618773), caused by mutation in the CALCRL gene (114190) on chromosome 2q31.
Lymphedema can also be a feature of syndromic disorders such as lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome (153400), which is caused by mutation in the FOXC2 gene (602402), and various forms of nonimmune hydrops fetalis (NIHF; see 236750).
Milroy (1892), a physician in Omaha, Nebraska, described the lymphedema in 6 generations of a family. Also see Milroy (1928).
Rosen et al. (1962) observed congenital chylous ascites in an affected infant whose father had recurrent swelling of the scrotum beginning at the age of 20 years. Marked loss of albumin into the intestinal tract with consequent hypoproteinemia was demonstrated.
In 2 patients, Hurwitz and Pinals (1964) observed persistent bilateral pleural effusion in which the protein content of the pleural fluid was high. Esterly (1965) described a family with 15 affected members of 3 generations. One child had striking congenital edema of the hands as a main feature and a second had similar swelling of the hands, as well as bilateral involvement of the legs and feet. A sib of the proposita had no apparent lymphedema, although 2 of his 4 children had bilateral swelling of the legs and feet. He was regarded at first as a 'skipped' generation similar to those noted in previous pedigrees of Milroy disease. Closer examination, however, demonstrated a definite 3 x 5 cm area of slight edema on the medial aspect of the left lower leg. This area was warm to the touch and could be pitted against the underlying tibia. High blood flow in the leg affected by congenital lymphedema has been thought to be due to accumulation of vasodilatory metabolites. Lymphedematous legs generally feel warm and the patients have warm feet. The proposita in the family reported by Esterly (1965) could recover the newspaper from her front walk in her bare feet in winter without discomfort. Esterly (1965) reviewed 22 previously documented pedigrees which, with his own family, gave a total of 152 affected persons.
Ferrell et al. (1998) studied 13 lymphedema families from the U.S. and Canada. All members of these families were of western European ancestry. In the 13 families, 105 individuals were classified as affected, with a male:female ratio of 1:2.3. The age of onset of lymphedema ranged from prenatal (diagnosed by ultrasound) to age 55 years. When affected x normal matings were analyzed, 76 of 191 children were affected, yielding a penetrance of 80%.
Brice et al. (2005) examined 211 individuals from 10 families with a history of congenital lymphedema and mutations in FLT4. Mutations were confirmed in 64 clinically affected individuals, and 7 clinically unaffected individuals were also found to have mutations. In all but 2 patients onset of swelling was from birth. Lymphedema was confined to the lower extremities in all patients and was associated with secondary changes including deep creases over the toes, small dysplastic ('ski jump') toenails, and papillomas. Brice et al. (2005) noted that these patients also had prominent, wide-caliber leg and foot veins not seen in other forms of congenital lymphedema. Apart from hydroceles and some urethral abnormalities, there were no major structural abnormalities or consistent dysmorphic features.
Ghalamkarpour et al. (2006) reported 3 unrelated families with autosomal dominant lymphedema confirmed by genetic analysis (see, e.g., 136352.0008-136352.0009). In 1 family, the proband had severe elephantiasis up to the inguinal ligaments bilaterally associated with chronic venous ulcerations, cellulitis, and papillomatosis. In another family, a 22-week-old fetus was found to have fetal hydrops with bilateral leg edema, pleural effusions, hydrothorax, and pulmonary hypoplasia on ultrasound. The pregnancy was terminated. Other affected family members had congenital lymphedema of the legs with variable severity. One affected member from a third family had spontaneous resolution of the edema.
Liu et al. (2012) examined 378 patients with primary lymphedema of the lower extremities using magnetic resonance lymphangiography. Defects of the inguinal lymph nodes were detected in 63 (17%) of the patients, with mild or moderate dilation of the afferent lymph vessels. Lymphatic abnormalities were present in 123 (32%) of the patients, including aplasia, hypoplasia, or hyperplasia, with no obvious defects of the drainage lymph nodes. Abnormalities of both lymph vessels and lymph nodes were observed in 192 (51%) of the patients. There was no significant difference in age at onset or severity of disease between the groups, including between patients exhibiting hypoplasia or hyperplasia.



IRS2
**{Diabetes mellitus, noninsulin-dependent}, 125853 (3), AD**
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is distinct from maturity-onset diabetes of the young (see 606391) in that it is polygenic, characterized by gene-gene and gene-environment interactions with onset in adulthood, usually at age 40 to 60 but occasionally in adolescence if a person is obese. The pedigrees are rarely multigenerational. The penetrance is variable, possibly 10 to 40% (Fajans et al., 2001). Persons with type 2 diabetes usually have an obese body habitus and manifestations of the so-called metabolic syndrome (see 605552), which is characterized by diabetes, insulin resistance, hypertension, and hypertriglyceridemia.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Susceptibility to Type 2 Diabetes
Susceptibility to T2D1 (601283) is conferred by variation in the calpain-10 gene (CAPN10; 605286) on chomosome 2q37. The T2D2 locus (601407) on chromosome 12q was found in a Finnish population. The T2D3 locus (603694) maps to chomosome 20. The T2D4 locus (608036) maps to chromosome 5q34-q35. Susceptibility to T2D5 (616087) is conferred by variation in the TBC1D4 gene (612465) on chromosome 13q22.
A mutation has been observed in hepatocyte nuclear factor-4-alpha (HNF4A; 600281.0004) in a French family with NIDDM of late onset. Mutations in the NEUROD1 gene (601724) on chromosome 2q32 were found to cause type II diabetes mellitus in 2 families. Mutation in the GLUT2 glucose transporter was associated with NIDDM in 1 patient (138160.0001). Mutation in the MAPK8IP1 gene, which encodes the islet-brain-1 protein, was found in a family with type II diabetes in individuals in 4 successive generations (604641.0001). Polymorphism in the KCNJ11 gene (600937.0014) confers susceptibility. In French white families, Vionnet et al. (2000) found evidence for a susceptibility locus for type II diabetes on 3q27-qter. They confirmed the diabetes susceptibility locus on 1q21-q24 reported by Elbein et al. (1999) in whites and by Hanson et al. (1998) in Pima Indians. A mutation in the GPD2 gene (138430.0001) on chromosome 2q24.1, encoding mitochondrial glycerophosphate dehydrogenase, was found in a patient with type II diabetes mellitus and in his glucose-intolerant half sister. Mutations in the PAX4 gene (167413) have been identified in patients with type II diabetes. Triggs-Raine et al. (2002) stated that in the Oji-Cree, a gly319-to-ser change in HNF1-alpha (142410.0008) behaves as a susceptibility allele for type II diabetes. Mutation in the HNF1B gene (189907.0007) was found in 2 Japanese patients with typical late-onset type II diabetes. Mutations in the IRS1 gene (147545) have been found in patients with type II diabetes. A missense mutation in the AKT2 gene (164731.0001) caused autosomal dominant type II diabetes in 1 family. A (single-nucleotide polymorphism) SNP in the 3-prime untranslated region of the resistin gene (605565.0001) was associated with susceptibility to diabetes and to insulin resistance-related hypertension in Chinese subjects. Susceptibility to insulin resistance has been associated with polymorphism in the TCF1 (142410.0011), PPP1R3A (600917.0001), PTPN1 (176885.0001), ENPP1 (173335.0006), IRS1 (147545.0002), and EPHX2 (132811.0001) genes. The K121Q polymorphism of ENPP1 (173335.0006) is associated with susceptibility to type II diabetes; a haplotype defined by 3 SNPs of this gene, including K121Q, is associated with obesity, glucose intolerance, and type II diabetes. A SNP in the promoter region of the hepatic lipase gene (151670.0004) predicts conversion from impaired glucose tolerance to type II diabetes. Variants of transcription factor 7-like-2 (TCF7L2; 602228.0001), located on 10q, have also been found to confer risk of type II diabetes. A common sequence variant, rs10811661, on chromosome 9p21 near the CDKN2A (600160) and CDKN2B (600431) genes has been associated with risk of type II diabetes. Variation in the PPARG gene (601487) has been associated with risk of type 2 diabetes. A promoter polymorphism in the IL6 gene (147620) is associated with susceptibility to NIDDM. Variation in the KCNJ15 gene (602106) has been associated with T2DM in lean Asians. Variation in the SLC30A8 gene (611145) has been associated with susceptibility to T2D. Variation in the HMGA1 gene (600701.0001) is associated with an increased risk of type II diabetes. Mutation in the MTNR1B gene (600804) is associated with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.
Protection Against Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
Protein-truncating variants in the SLC30A8 (611145) have been associated with a reduced risk for T2D.



GDAP1
**Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, axonal, type 2K, 607831 (3), AR, AD**
Autosomal Recessive CMT2K
Birouk et al. (2003) reported a consanguineous Moroccan family in which 4 members were affected with a severe form of autosomal recessive axonal CMT. Onset was in early childhood (younger than 3 years) in all patients. The proband had hypotonia at birth and delayed development of early motor milestones. All patients had difficulty walking, foot deformities, kyphoscoliosis, distal limb muscle weakness and atrophy, areflexia, and diminished sensation in the lower limbs. Weakness in the upper limbs occurred in the first decade, with clawing of the fingers in all patients. There was no cranial nerve involvement, vocal cord paresis, or cerebellar or pyramidal signs. Motor nerve conduction velocity in 1 patient was slightly reduced at 40 m/s, and pathologic examination of 1 patient showed loss of myelinated fibers without signs of obvious demyelination and regenerating axon clusters consistent with an axonal neuropathy.
Xin et al. (2008) reported 3 sibs from a consanguineous Amish family with autosomal recessive axonal CMT2K. The patients had onset in childhood of distal lower muscle weakness and borderline nerve conduction velocity measurements, consistent with an axonal neuropathy. The disorder was gradually progressive with worsening of the lower limb symptoms, but the patients were still able to do some daily activities in their twenties. There was no vocal cord or hand muscle involvement.
Kabzinska et al. (2010) reported affected individuals from 4 families and 2 individual patients with early-onset autosomal recessive CMT2K. Five of the families were Polish and 1 was Bulgarian. The age at onset ranged from 2 to 10 years, and all had gait abnormalities due to lower limb weakness and atrophy. Electrophysiologic studies showed that most patients had normal motor and sensory nerve conduction velocities, whereas a few had reduced responses. Two patients became wheelchair-bound as young adults.
Autosomal Dominant CMT2K
Chung et al. (2008) reported a Korean father and daughter with late-onset autosomal dominant axonal CMT associated with a heterozygous mutation in the GDAP1 gene (Q218E; 606598.0012). The patients had onset of gait difficulties at ages 25 and 16 years, respectively. Other features included hand muscle atrophy, decreased distal sensation in the upper and lower limbs, and normal or mildly reduced nerve conduction velocities. Sural nerve biopsy findings in the father were consistent with a primarily axonal process, but there were also signs of demyelination. The phenotype in this family was much milder than that observed in patients with recessive GDAP1 mutations.
Crimella et al. (2010) reported 3 Italian probands with autosomal dominant CMT2K. In all cases, the proband presented in the first decade (range, 3 to 8 years), whereas their affected parents had much later onset of the disorder in their twenties through forties. The probands also showed a more severe phenotype than their parents, with loss of independent ambulation in 2. None had vocal cord paresis or pyramidal signs. The study indicated significant intrafamilial variability of the autosomal dominant form of this disorder.
Zimon et al. (2011) reported 8 unrelated families with autosomal dominant CMT due to 4 different heterozygous mutations in the GDAP1 gene (606598.0009; 606598.0017-606598.0019). The phenotype varied considerably, even within a family, and some mutation carriers were asymptomatic, consistent with incomplete penetrance. The age at onset ranged from childhood to adulthood, and the most common initial symptom was walking difficulties due to distal muscle weakness and atrophy. The disorder was slowly progressive, but most patients remained ambulatory. A few patients also developed proximal weakness. The majority of patients had an axonal pattern on electrophysiologic studies, but 2 unrelated patients with a more severe phenotype had an intermediate pattern between axonal and demyelinating neuropathy. Zimon et al. (2011) noted that the phenotype in heterozygous GDAP1 mutation carriers was generally milder than that in patients with 2 GDAP1 mutations.
**Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, axonal, with vocal cord paresis, 607706 (3), AR**
Cuesta et al. (2002) reported 3 families of Spanish ancestry with an autosomal recessive axonal CMT phenotype associated with hoarse voice and vocal cord paresis. The clinical picture was characterized by onset in childhood of weakness and hand and foot wasting, leading to disability by the end of the first decade and necessitating wheelchair use (Sevilla et al., 2001). Sensory nerve action potentials were decreased or absent in all affected individuals. Sural nerve biopsies of 2 probands showed loss of myelinated fibers and axonal degeneration, with no signs of demyelination and remyelination. Sevilla et al. (2003) provided a more detailed clinical description of the 3 families reported by Cuesta et al. (2002). All 9 affected patients had disease onset in the neonatal period or before the age of 2 years. All patients showed severe distal muscle weakness and atrophy of the upper and lower limbs, often classified as paralysis. All patients had severe sensory loss in the hands, including pinprick, vibration, and touch, with additional loss of vibratory sense in the feet. All had absent reflexes. Spinal deformities, pes cavus, claw hands, and contractures were also present. Motor nerve conduction velocities, when present, were within the normal range. Sural nerve biopsies showed marked loss of myelinated fibers, axonal degeneration and regeneration, and occasional onion bulb formations.
**Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, recessive intermediate, A, 608340 (3), AR**
Autosomal recessive intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease A (CMTRIA) is a peripheral neuropathy characterized by distal sensory impairment predominantly affecting the lower limbs and resulting in walking difficulties due to muscle weakness and atrophy. The upper limbs may also be affected. Electrophysiologic studies and sural nerve biopsy show mixed features of demyelinating and axonal neuropathy. Onset is usually in early childhood (summary by Senderek et al., 2003).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Recessive Intermediate Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease
See also CMTRIB (613641), caused by mutation in the KARS gene (601421) on chromosome 16q; CMTRIC (615376), caused by mutation in the PLEKHG5 gene (611101) on chromosome 1p36; and CMTRID (616039), caused by mutation in the COX6A1 gene (602072) on chromosome 12q24.
Nelis et al. (2002) reported a consanguineous Turkish family in which 2 sisters had a mixed form of axonal and demyelinating autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Onset was at the age of 4 years in both with foot deformity. At ages 12 and 13 years the sisters were still walking independently with ankle-foot orthosis. No muscle weakness was recorded in the arms or legs but there was sensory loss. In both, the reflexes were normal in the arms but absent at the ankle. Nerve conduction velocities (NCV) were normal.
Senderek et al. (2003) reported a consanguineous Turkish family in which 2 cousins had a severe form of intermediate CMT. Onset was in early childhood (2-3 years) after normal early motor development. Features included foot deformities, lower and upper limb muscle weakness and atrophy, steppage gait, decreased or absent reflexes, and distal sensory impairment. Motor NCVs were decreased (26-31 m/s), and nerve biopsy showed features of both demyelination and axonal degeneration.
Kabzinska et al. (2011) reported 2 Polish sisters with a severe, early-onset form of CMT due to a homozygous missense mutation in the GDAP1 gene (G327D; 606598.0016). The proband showed awkward gait and foot deformity at age 2 years. At age 5, physical examination showed distal muscle atrophy of the lower limbs, with foot drop, pes equinovarus, areflexia, scoliosis, and inability to walk without aid. Sensory modalities were preserved. Motor nerve conduction velocity of the median nerve was decreased at 31.2 m/s, and sural nerve biopsy showed a chronic mixed axonal and demyelinating neuropathy, with loss of myelinated fibers, thin myelin sheaths, segmental demyelination, regenerating clusters, and small onion bulbs. The disorder was progressive, later involving the upper limbs, and she lost the ability to walk at age 13 years. At age 29, distal joint position was affected. Her sister had a similar phenotype, with distal muscle weakness and atrophy of the upper and lower limbs, areflexia, scoliosis, Achilles tendon contractures, and loss of ambulation at age 13 years. Nerve conduction velocities were normal.
**Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, type 4A, 214400 (3), AR**
By convention, the designation CMT4 is applied to autosomal recessive forms of demyelinating Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, which is a peripheral neuropathy characterized by distal motor and sensory impairment resulting in gait difficulties and associated with foot deformities. Motor nerve conduction velocities are decreased, and sural nerve biopsies show loss of myelinated fibers. The age at onset and severity is variable (summary by Patzko and Shy, 2012).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease Type 4
Several different subtypes of autosomal recessive demyelinating CMT (CMT4) have been identified, each with particular ethnic, pathologic, or clinical characteristics: CMT4A; CMT4B, which includes CMT4B1 (601382), caused by mutation in the MTMR2 gene (603557), CMT4B2 (604563), caused by mutation in the SBF2 gene (607697), and CMT4B3 (615284), caused by mutation in the SBF1 gene (603560); CMT4C (601596), caused by mutation in the SH3TC2 gene (608206); CMT4D (601455), caused by mutation in the NDRG1 gene (605262); CMT4E (605253), caused by mutation in the EGR2 (129010) or MPZ (159440) genes; CMT4F (614895), caused by mutation in the PRX gene (605725); CMT4G, or Russe-type hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy, (605285), which maps to chromosome 10q23; CMT4H (609311), caused by mutation in the FGD4 gene (611104); CMT4J (611228), caused by mutation in the FIG4 gene (609390); and CMT4K (616684), caused by mutation in the SURF1 gene (185620).
Allan (1939) found 8 young girls with a recessive form of peroneal atrophy in a North Carolina orthopedic hospital which catered to patients under the age of 16 years. The 8 came from 6 families in which both parents were normal. In 4 of the 6 families the parents were cousins. Beighton (1971) described 9 (possibly 10) cases of recessive CMT disease in an inbred Amish group. Identical twins were concordantly affected.
Ben Othmane et al. (1993, 1993) reported 4 Tunisian families with a homogeneous form of autosomal recessive demyelinating CMT. The disorder, which they designated type 4A, was a severe neuropathy of childhood characterized by early age of onset (before 2 years of age), rapidly progressive distal weakness and atrophy of the limbs leading to an inability to walk in late childhood or adolescence, mild sensory loss with abolished deep tendon reflexes, normal cerebrospinal fluid, severely decreased motor nerve conduction velocity (NCV), and hypomyelination.



NDUFS4
**Mitochondrial complex I deficiency, nuclear type 1, 252010 (3), AR**
Isolated complex I deficiency is the most common enzymatic defect of the oxidative phosphorylation disorders (McFarland et al., 2004; Kirby et al., 2004). It causes a wide range of clinical disorders, ranging from lethal neonatal disease to adult-onset neurodegenerative disorders. Phenotypes include macrocephaly with progressive leukodystrophy, nonspecific encephalopathy, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, myopathy, liver disease, Leigh syndrome (see 256000), Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (535000), and some forms of Parkinson disease (see 556500) (Loeffen et al., 2000; Pitkanen et al., 1996; Robinson, 1998).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Complex I Deficiency
Mitochondrial complex I deficiency shows extreme genetic heterogeneity and can be caused by mutation in nuclear-encoded genes or in mitochondrial-encoded genes. There are no obvious genotype-phenotype correlations, and inference of the underlying basis from the clinical or biochemical presentation is difficult, if not impossible (summary by Haack et al., 2012). However, the majority of cases are caused by mutations in nuclear-encoded genes (Loeffen et al., 2000; Triepels et al., 2001).
Complex I deficiency resulting from mutation in nuclear-encoded genes include MC1DN1, caused by mutation in the NDUFS4 gene (602694); MC1DN2 (618222), caused by mutation in the NDUFS8 gene (602141); MC1DN3 (618224), caused by mutation in the NDUFS7 gene (601825); MC1DN4 (618225), caused by mutation in the NDUFV1 gene (161015); MC1DN5 (618226), caused by mutation in the NDUFS1 gene (157655); MC1DN6 (618228), caused by mutation in the NDUFS2 gene (602985); MC1DN7 (618229), caused by mutation in the NDUFV2 gene (600532); MC1DN8 (618230), caused by mutation in the NDUFS3 gene (603846); MC1DN9 (618232), caused by mutation in the NDUFS6 gene (603848); MC1DN10 (618233), caused by mutation in the NDUFAF2 gene (609653); MC1DN11 (618234), caused by mutation in the NDUFAF1 gene (606934); MC1DN12 (301020), caused by mutation in the NDUFA1 gene (300078); MC1DN13 (618235), caused by mutation in the NDUFA2 gene (602137); MC1DN14 (618236), caused by mutation in the NDUFA11 gene (612638); MC1DN15 (618237), caused by mutation in the NDUFAF4 gene (611776); MC1DN16 (618238), caused by mutation in the NDUFAF5 gene (612360); MC1DN17 (618239), caused by mutation in the NDUFAF6 gene (612392); MC1DN18 (618240), caused by mutation in the NDUFAF3 gene (612911); MC1DN19 (618241), caused by mutation in the FOXRED1 gene (613622); MC1DN20 (611126), caused by mutation in the ACAD9 gene (611103); MC1DN21 (618242), caused by mutation in the NUBPL gene (613621); MC1DN22 (618243), caused by mutation in the NDUFA10 gene (603835); MC1DN23 (618244), caused by mutation in the NDUFA12 gene (614530); MC1DN24 (618245), caused by mutation in the NDUFB9 gene (601445); MC1DN25 (618246), caused by mutation in the NDUFB3 gene (603839); MC1DN26 (618247), caused by mutation in the NDUFA9 gene (603834); MC1DN27 (618248), caused by mutation in the MTFMT gene (611766); MC1DN28 (618249), caused by mutation in the NDUFA13 gene (609435); MC1DN29 (618250), caused by mutation in the TMEM126B gene (615533); MC1DN30 (301021), caused by mutation in the NDUFB11 gene (300403); MC1DN31 (618251), caused by mutation in the TIMMDC1 gene (615534); MC1DN32 (618252), caused by mutation in the NDUFB8 gene (602140); MC1DN33 (618253), caused by mutation in the NDUFA6 gene (602138); MC1DN34 (618776), caused by mutation in the NDUFAF8 gene (618461); and MC1DN35 (619003), caused by mutation in the NDUFB10 gene (603843).
Complex I deficiency with mitochondrial inheritance has been associated with mutation in 6 mitochondrial-encoded components of complex I: MTND1 (516000), MTND2 (516001), MTND3 (516002), MTND4 (516003), MTND5 (516005), MTND6 (516006). Most of these patients have a phenotype of Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON; 535000) or Leigh syndrome. Features of complex I deficiency may also be caused by mutation in other mitochondrial genes, including MTTS2 (590085).
Van den Heuvel et al. (1998) reported a patient with fatal multisystemic complex I deficiency and homozygous mutation in the NDUFS4 gene. He had normal muscle morphology and a remarkably nonspecific fatally progressive course without increased lactate concentrations in body fluids. He presented at 8 months of age with severe vomiting, failure to thrive, and hypotonia. At the age of 13 months, he showed severe psychomotor retardation, convulsions, bradypnea, cyanosis, hypotonia, and depressed tendon reflexes. Cerebral MRI showed generalized brain atrophy and symmetric basal ganglia abnormalities. He died of cardiorespiratory failure at the age of 16 months.
Budde et al. (2000) reported 2 unrelated patients, born to consanguineous parents, with complex I deficiency and decreased activity of complex III. The female patient showed, within 1 week of age, hypotonia, absent eye contact, lethargy, and failure to thrive. At 3 months of age, microcephaly was present and lactic acidemia with an increased lactate/pyruvate ratio was found. CT and MRI showed bilateral basal ganglia hypodensities. The child died at 3 months of age. Except for hypospadias noted at birth, the male patient appeared normal until the age of 7 weeks at which time muscular hypotonia and lack of visual and auditive attention were observed. At the age of 3 months he was found to have elevated lactate levels in the blood. Cranial MRI showed hyperintense signals resembling those found in Leigh syndrome (see 256000). Cardiac ultrasound showed concentric hypertrophy of the left ventricle with hypercontractility. He died from cardiocirculatory insufficiency.
Benit et al. (2003) identified 2 sisters in a consanguineous family with complex I deficiency nuclear type 1 and Leigh syndrome.
Neuroradiologic Features in Patients with Known Nuclear or Mitochondrial Mutations
Lebre et al. (2011) performed a retrospective review of the neuroradiologic features of 30 patients with complex I deficiency due to either nuclear (10 patients) or mitochondrial (20 patients) mutations. All patients had MRI abnormalities in the brainstem that were hyperintense on T2-weighted images and hypointense on T1-weighted images. Brainstem lesions were associated with at least 1 striatal anomaly (putamen or caudate) in 27 of 30 patients. Ten patients had thalamic anomalies, all of whom also had striatal lesions. Caudate lesions were more common in patients with mtDNA (50%) compared to those with nuclear (10%) mutations. Stroke-like lesions predominantly affecting the gray matter were observed in 40% of patients with mtDNA mutations, but in none of patients with nuclear mutations. A diffuse supratentorial leukoencephalopathy involving the deep lobar white matter was observed in over 50% of patients with nuclear mutations, but in none of patients with mtDNA mutations. Cerebellar hyperintensities were found in 45% of patients, regardless of the mutated genome, but cerebellar atrophy was found only in those with mtDNA mutations. All 10 patients studied had increased lactate on magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
Patients with Unknown Mutations
Morgan-Hughes et al. (1979) presented the first report of isolated complex I deficiency. Two sisters had a mitochondrial myopathy characterized by weakness, marked exercise intolerance, and fluctuating lactic acidemia. Increased weakness was precipitated by unaccustomed exertion, fasting, or alcohol. During exercise, blood lactate and pyruvate levels rose abruptly and markedly. Mitochondrial respiratory rates were greatly decreased with all NAD-linked substrates, but normal with succinate and with TMPD plus ascorbate. Mitochondrial cytochrome components were normal. Morgan-Hughes et al. (1979) concluded that the defect was at the level of the NADH-CoQ reductase complex.
Land et al. (1981) reported a young man with weakness, exercise intolerance, muscle wasting, and exercise-induced lactic acidosis. Biochemical studies showed deficiency of NADH-cytochrome b reductase. The defect appeared to be situated between NADH dehydrogenase and the CoQ-cytochrome b complex. Land et al. (1981) postulated a derangement of a nonheme iron-sulfur center.
Moreadith et al. (1984) reported a male infant with complex I deficiency who developed respiratory distress and hypoglycemia on the first day of life. At 6 weeks, he showed generalized hypotonia and concentric biventricular cardiac hypertrophy on echocardiography. Lactic acidemia was progressive, and the child died at 16 weeks of age. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed giant mitochondria in which both inner and outer membranes were arranged in whorls. Biochemical studies of mitochondria from 4 organs showed a moderate to profound decrease in the ability to oxidize pyruvate, malate plus glutamate, citrate and other NAD-linked respiratory substrates. Oxidation of succinate was normal. Further studies localized the defect to the inner membrane mitochondrial NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase. Electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy showed almost total loss of the iron-sulfur clusters of complex I. The most pronounced deficiency was in skeletal muscle, the least in kidney mitochondria. There was no record of a similar problem in the family and the parents were not related. Since the parents subsequently had a normal male child, Moreadith et al. (1984) excluded mitochondrial inheritance and suggested either autosomal recessive inheritance or a de novo dominant mutation.
In a study on tissue from the patient reported by Moreadith et al. (1984), Moreadith et al. (1987) found that antisera against complex I immunoprecipitated NADH-ferricyanide reductase from the control but not the patient's mitochondria. Immunoprecipitation and SDS-PAGE of complex I polypeptides demonstrated that most of the 25 polypeptides comprising complex I were present in the affected mitochondria. A more detailed analysis using subunit selective antisera against the main polypeptides of the iron-protein fragments of complex I showed a selective absence of the 75- and 13-kD polypeptides, suggesting a deficiency of at least 2 polypeptides comprising the iron-protein fragment of complex I. Moreadith et al. (1987) hypothesized that the genetic defect involved transcription or translation of the polypeptides, the transport of these polypeptides into the mitochondria, or the site of assembly of complex I.
Hoppel et al. (1987) investigated a mitochondrial defect in a male infant with fatal congenital lactic acidosis, high lactate-to-pyruvate ratio, hypotonia, and cardiomyopathy. His sister had died with a similar disorder. Resting oxygen consumption was 150% of controls. Pathologic findings included increased numbers of skeletal muscle mitochondria (many with proliferated, concentric cristae), cardiomegaly, fatty infiltration of the viscera, and spongy encephalopathy. Mitochondria from liver and muscle biopsies oxidized NADH-linked substrates at rates 20 to 50% of controls, whereas succinate oxidation by muscle mitochondria was increased. Mitochondrial NADH dehydrogenase activity (complex I) was 0 to 10% of controls, whereas activity of other electron transport complexes in related enzymes was normal. Hoppel et al. (1987) suggested a familial deficiency of a component of mitochondrial NADH dehydrogenase proximal to the rotenone-sensitive site.
Wijburg et al. (1989) reported a sibship born to healthy first-cousin Moroccan parents with 2 well-studied children with severe congenital lactic acidosis as well as 4 others with a clinical history compatible with the same defect. Treatment initially by artificial respiration and peritoneal dialysis followed later by high doses of menadione effected a remarkable recovery. Despite the parental consanguinity, Barth et al. (1989) suggested that the defect in this family involved the mitochondrial genome: they detected a possible deletion in the mitochondrial-encoded MTND3 protein in skeletal muscle.
Slipetz et al. (1991) studied 2 unrelated patients with complex I deficiency with different phenotypes. One patient had hypotonia, seizures, and hepatomegaly, and died of lactic acidosis on day 13 of life. Biochemical analysis of complex I subunits showed absence of a 20-kD protein predicted to be encoded by the nuclear genome. Complex I activity was 6% of control values. The other child had marked growth and developmental delay, and showed altered neurologic function and seizures beginning at age 8 years. Other features included ptosis, sensorineural hearing loss, hypotonia, incoordination, and hyporeflexia. Mild facial coarseness was also observed. No complex I subunit abnormalities were detected by immunoprecipitation or Western blot analysis, but complex I activity was 15% of control values.
Bentlage et al. (1995) showed deficits of specific complex I protein subunits in patients with complex I deficiency.
Dionisi-Vici et al. (1997) reported 2 infant sibs with fatal progressive macrocephaly and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Onset of symptoms was at the end of the first month of life with massive brain swelling. Light microscopy showed extensive small-vessel proliferation and gliosis. Complex I deficiency was detected in cultured fibroblasts, skeletal muscle, and heart muscle.
Procaccio et al. (1999) reported 2 unrelated patients with fatal infantile lactic acidosis associated with isolated complex I deficiency. Reexpression of complex I subunits and recovery of complex I activity in patients' mitochondria after transnuclear complementation by nuclei from cells without mitochondria enabled the authors to infer the nuclear DNA origin of the defects in both patients. Patient 1 showed reduced amounts of the 24- and 51-kD subunits and normal amounts of all the other investigated subunits. Patient 2 showed severely decreased amounts of all the investigated subunits. Patient 1 developed generalized hypotonia with poor gesticulation in the first 24 hours of life. By day 2, he was very floppy with poor response to painful stimuli and required ventilatory assistance. Hepatic enlargement was noticed, and chest x-rays showed slight cardiomegaly. Cranial ultrasonography showed brain edema, and severe lactic acidosis was detected. The patient went into a deep coma and died at 11 days. Patient 2 vomited frequently in the first 2 weeks of life and at 5 weeks showed deterioration of neurologic status with hypotonia, weakness, and lethargy. In the first month, the head circumference was noted to be rapidly increasing from 33 to 40 cm. Computed tomographic scan showed a very hypodense brain with increased brain volume and extensive cerebral edema. Marked metabolic acidosis with hyperlactic acidemia was demonstrated. Despite intensive care, the neurologic state worsened rapidly and brain death occurred at 6 weeks of age. Autopsy showed acute necrotizing encephalopathy, but no hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
In a study of 157 patients with respiratory chain defects, von Kleist-Retzow et al. (1998) found complex I deficiency in 33% and combined complex I and IV deficiency in another 28%. The main clinical features in this series were truncal hypotonia (36%), antenatal (20%) and postnatal (31%) growth retardation, cardiomyopathy (24%), encephalopathy (20%), and liver failure (20%). No correlation was found between the type of respiratory chain defect and the clinical presentation, but complex I and complex I+IV deficiencies were significantly more frequent in cases of cardiomyopathy (p less than 0.01) and hepatic failure (p less than 0.05), respectively. The sex ratio was skewed toward males being affected with complex I deficiency. A high rate of parental consanguinity was observed in complex IV (20%) and complex I+IV (28%) deficiencies.
Loeffen et al. (2000) retrospectively examined clinical and biochemical characteristics of 27 patients, all of whom presented in infancy and young childhood with isolated enzymatic complex I deficiency established in cultured skin fibroblasts; common pathogenic mtDNA point mutations and major rearrangements were absent. Clinical phenotypes included Leigh syndrome in 7 patients, Leigh-like syndrome in 6, fatal infantile lactic acidosis in 3, neonatal cardiomyopathy with lactic acidosis in 3, macrocephaly with progressive leukodystrophy in 2, and a residual group of unspecified encephalomyopathy in 6, subdivided into progressive (in 4) and stable (in 2) variants.



GABBR2
**Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 59, 617904 (3), AD**
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy-59 (DEE59) is characterized by severe global developmental delay apparent in infancy with onset of various types of seizures in the first months of life (range 3 to 11 months). The seizures are usually refractory and are often associated with hypsarrhythmia on EEG, although brain imaging is usually normal. More severely affected individuals may be unable to speak or walk, have poor interaction, and require a feeding tube (summary by the EuroEPINOMICS-RES Consortium et al., 2014).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of DEE, see 308350.
The EuroEPINOMICS-RES Consortium et al. (2014) reported 2 unrelated patients, a 3-year-old girl (NLES8) and an 18-year-old man (NLES10), with DEE59. The patients had onset of seizures within the first 3 months of life. The girl had multiple seizure types, whereas the male had infantile spasms that mostly resolved by age 5 months, although he had a few focal dyscognitive seizures and nonepileptic apneic spells later in life. Both patients had hypsarrhythmia on EEG. The girl had profound intellectual disability with no head control, inability to speak, and severe hypotonia, and she was fed by a G-tube. She reacted to music but not to people. The older patient had severe intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, no speech, mild ataxia, sleeping disorder, and automutilation behavior, and he could walk only with support.
Hamdan et al. (2017) reported a 14-year-old boy (HSJ0048), born of unrelated French Canadian parents, who presented with severe developmental delay and onset of brief focal seizures at 11 months of age. The seizures sometimes progressed, and were controlled by medication. EEG showed modified hypsarrhythmia. Refractory seizures of variable types recurred at age 4.5 years. At age 14, he had severe intellectual disability with inability to sit on his own, absent language, poor eye contact, lack of interest in the environment, drooling, hypotonia, scoliosis, and bouts of aggression. Brain imaging showed enlarged ventricles.
**Neurodevelopmental disorder with poor language and loss of hand skills, 617903 (3), AD**
NDPLHS is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by developmental stagnation or regression apparent in the first years of life and manifest as loss of purposeful hand movements, loss of language, and intellectual disability. Additional features may include stereotypic movements, dystonia, gait abnormalities, sleep disturbances, and small hands and feet. The phenotype is reminiscent of Rett syndrome (RTT; 312750) (summary by Yoo et al., 2017).
Lopes et al. (2016) reported a 19-year-old Portuguese woman (patient 9), born of unrelated parents, with a neurodevelopmental disorder reminiscent of atypical Rett syndrome. She was noted to have stagnation of psychomotor development around 7 months of age, followed by regression and lack of interest in the environment. She walked at age 24 months, but never achieved purposeful hand grasp, language, or sphincter control. She had severe intellectual disability with autistic features, agitation, bruxism, sleep disturbances, crying spells, and hyperventilation. Additional features included stereotypic movements, dystonia of the lower limbs, swallowing difficulties, small and cold hands and feet, and enlarged ventricles on brain imaging. She did not have seizures.
Yoo et al. (2017) reported 4 unrelated patients, ranging in age from 8 to 28 years, with NDPLHS. Two Korean patients were ascertained from a cohort of 34 patients with a Rett-like syndrome who did not carry mutations in the MECP2 gene (300005). Two additional European patients were found through the GeneMatcher database. All patients showed a period of neurodevelopmental regression in the first years of life, had partial or complete loss of acquired purposeful hand skills, and had stereotypic hand movements. Two patients had partial or complete loss of acquired language skills, and 3 had gait abnormalities, including inability to walk in 1 and dyspraxia in 2. Other more variable features included microcephaly, macrocephaly, sleep disturbances, abnormal breathing, bruxism, self-injurious behavior, autonomic dysfunction, and small and cold hands and feet. One patient developed generalized tonic-clonic seizures at age 9 years. Brain imaging, performed in 3 patients, was normal.
Vuillaume et al. (2018) reported a 12-year-old girl with profound intellectual disability, hand stereotypies, and sleep and breathing abnormalities, but no seizures. The phenotype was reminiscent of Rett syndrome.
**{Nicotine dependence, susceptibility to}, 188890 (3)**



PRKG1
**Aortic aneurysm, familial thoracic 8, 615436 (3), AD**
Tran-Fadulu et al. (2006) described 3 families with autosomal dominant inheritance of thoracic aortic aneurysms leading to either type A or type B dissections and a young age of onset of aortic dissections in both men and women. One family (TAA216) was a large 6-generation pedigree in which the second-generation matriach died suddenly at 35 years of age from rupture of the ascending aorta, with cystic medial necrosis noted on pathology. One of her daughters died suddenly at 18 years of age due to type A aortic dissection with rupture; a second daughter died of type A dissection at 45 years of age, with medial degeneration noted on pathology. A third daughter had type A aortic dissection at 37 years of age, and underwent repair, but died a year later of unknown causes. The second daughter had 12 children, half of whom had aortic disease: in addition to thoracic aortic aneurysms, 2 also had abdominal aortic aneurysms, 2 had aneurysms of the interatrial septum, 1 had mild tortuosity of the ascending aorta, and 1 had a subcutaneous arteriovenous aneurysm of the hand.



WDR60
**Short-rib thoracic dysplasia 8 with or without polydactyly, 615503 (3), AR**
Short-rib thoracic dysplasia (SRTD) with or without polydactyly refers to a group of autosomal recessive skeletal ciliopathies that are characterized by a constricted thoracic cage, short ribs, shortened tubular bones, and a 'trident' appearance of the acetabular roof. SRTD encompasses Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (EVC) and the disorders previously designated as Jeune syndrome or asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (ATD), short rib-polydactyly syndrome (SRPS), and Mainzer-Saldino syndrome (MZSDS). Polydactyly is variably present, and there is phenotypic overlap in the various forms of SRTDs, which differ by visceral malformation and metaphyseal appearance. Nonskeletal involvement can include cleft lip/palate as well as anomalies of major organs such as the brain, eye, heart, kidneys, liver, pancreas, intestines, and genitalia. Some forms of SRTD are lethal in the neonatal period due to respiratory insufficiency secondary to a severely restricted thoracic cage, whereas others are compatible with life (summary by Huber and Cormier-Daire, 2012 and Schmidts et al., 2013).
There is phenotypic overlap with the cranioectodermal dysplasias (Sensenbrenner syndrome; see CED1, 218330).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of short-rib thoracic dysplasia, see SRTD1 (208500).
McInerney-Leo et al. (2013) studied a nonconsanguineous Australian family of British and Maori descent in which the healthy parents had 2 offspring with short-rib polydactyly syndrome, clinically classified as SRPS type III (SRTD3; 613091). The first child presented with short long bones on ultrasound at 6 weeks' gestation. Follow-up ultrasound at 31 weeks' showed polyhydramnios, severe shortening of long bones with bowed femurs, macrocephaly, short ribs, and ambiguous genitalia. Born at 32 weeks' gestation, the baby died at 2 hours of life. Autopsy confirmed the above findings and in addition revealed postaxial polydactyly of both hands, syndactyly of some fingers and toes, acetabular spurs, pancreatic fibrosis, mild dilation of renal tubules, and enlarged liver with ductal plate malformation. A second pregnancy was terminated at 17 weeks' gestation after ultrasound showed short ribs and short bowed limbs. Autopsy further revealed brachydactyly (not polydactyly), conical epiphyses, hypoplastic trabecular bone, depressed nasal bridge, ventricular septal defect (VSD), focal cystic changes in the kidneys, prominent bile ducts, and early evidence of pulmonary hypoplasia.



FRMPD4
**Mental retardation, X-linked 104, 300983 (3), X-linked**
Hu et al. (2016) reported a large family (P58) in which 5 males had mild to severe intellectual disability with variable seizures, poor or absent speech, and behavioral problems. They also reported an unrelated patient (L87) who presented at age 17 years with significant developmental delay, absence of speech, and autism spectrum disorder.
Piard et al. (2018) reported follow-up of the patients reported by Hu et al. (2016) and identified 4 additional male patients from 2 additional unrelated families. Including the previous report, there were 10 affected males from 4 unrelated families with patients ranging from 4 to 66 years of age. All patients had global developmental delay with variably impaired intellectual development. Acquisition of walking was mildly delayed (by 30 months at the latest), and speech was also delayed, although several patients were unable to speak in their teens. Some patients had behavioral abnormalities, including autism spectrum disorder, hyperactivity, and aggression. Less common neurologic findings included hypotonia, spasticity, hyperreflexia, ataxia, and tremor. Two brothers had ophthalmic findings, including strabismus, nystagmus, myopia, and optic atrophy with no eye contact (in 1 of them), and another unrelated boy had strabismus and no eye contact. One patient in the large previously reported family had onset of seizures at age 19 years, whereas 2 sibs in another family had onset of focal seizures in the first years of life. Brain imaging, performed in a few patients, showed nonspecific and variable abnormalities, such as thin corpus callosum, cortical atrophy, and delayed myelination. A few patients had dysmorphic features, such as high forehead, retrognathia, dysplastic ears, frontal hair upsweep, broad nasal bridge, high-arched palate, and mild hand anomalies, but there was no distinctive facial gestalt. In 1 family, a female mutation carrier was noted to be mildly affected.



MME
**Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, axonal, type 2T, 617017 (3), AR, AD**
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2T (CMT2T) is a slowly progressive autosomal recessive sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy with onset in middle age (Higuchi et al., 2016).
For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of axonal CMT, see CMT2A1 (118210).
Higuchi et al. (2016) reported 10 unrelated Japanese patients with adult-onset Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. Most of the patients had one or more similarly affected family members, and 6 of the families were consanguineous. The mean age at disease onset was 47.2 years (range, 36-56 years), and all patients had slowly progressive weakness and atrophy of the distal lower limb muscles, resulting in gait disturbance, although none were wheelchair-bound. All also had distal sensory impairment and hyporeflexia. Electrophysiologic studies were consistent with an axonal neuropathy, with an intermediate phenotype in 1 patient. Sural nerve biopsy from 2 patients showed a decrease in the density of large myelinated fibers with thick myelin sheaths and clusters of myelinated fibers. None of the patients had additional neurologic signs, including pyramidal signs, cerebellar ataxia, cognitive impairment, or signs of Alzheimer disease. Brain imaging of 5 patients did not show cerebral atrophy.
**?Spinocerebellar ataxia 43, 617018 (3), AD**
Spinocerebellar ataxia-43 is an autosomal dominant, slowly progressive neurologic disorder characterized by adult-onset gait and limb ataxia and often associated with peripheral neuropathy mainly affecting the motor system, although some patients may have distal sensory impairment (summary by Depondt et al., 2016).
For a general discussion of autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia, see SCA1 (164400).
Depondt et al. (2016) reported a large 5-generation Belgian family in which 7 living members had adult-onset spinocerebellar ataxia and peripheral neuropathy. The 69-year-old proband presented around age 58 with gait and balance problems and pain in the distal lower limbs. She had pes cavus, mild distal lower limb atrophy, hyporeflexia with absent Achilles reflexes, and mild upper and lower limb ataxia. She also had mild upper limb cogwheel rigidity, positive palmomental reflex, hypometric saccades, and dysarthria. Sensory examination was normal. EMG showed a severe motor neuropathy with preserved sensory responses; nerve conduction velocities were normal. Brain imaging showed moderate cerebellar vermis atrophy. The 6 additional living affected family members had similar features, including balance problems, ataxia, unsteady gait, tremor, and hyporeflexia. More variable features included dysarthria, nystagmus, and distal sensory impairment consistent with a peripheral polyneuropathy. Two patients had an MRI that showed cerebellar atrophy, and 1 patient had a sural nerve biopsy that showed axonal neuropathy. Many of the patients also had pectus carinatum. None of the individuals reported cognitive problems.



RNF213
**{Moyamoya disease 2, susceptibility to}, 607151 (3)**
Moyamoya disease is a progressive cerebral angiopathy characterized by bilateral internal carotid artery stenosis and abnormal collateral vessels. The abnormal vessels resemble a 'puff of smoke' (moyamoya) on cerebral angiogram. Affected individuals can develop transient ischemic attacks and/or cerebral infarction, and rupture of the collateral vessels can cause intracranial hemorrhage (summary by Kamada et al., 2011).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of moyamoya disease, see MYMY1 (252350).
Liu et al. (2011) reported a Caucasian father of Czech descent and his 3 affected children with moyamoya disease. The father had a mild ischemic stroke at age 30 years, and his mother had died of ischemic stroke at age 35. The 3 children developed moyamoya disease at ages 5, 9, and 3 years, respectively. One had involuntary movements and another had signs of ischemic stroke. Diagnosis of the disorder was confirmed by brain MRI.
Miyatake et al. (2012) reported 2 Japanese sibs with MYMY2 confirmed by genetic analysis. One sib was homozygous for the 14576G-A RNF213 variant (613768.0001) and the other was heterozygous for the same variant. The homozygous 21-year-old brother had a transient ischemic attack (TIA) at age 2 years and was found to have moyamoya disease. Brain imaging showed a low-density area around the right middle cerebral artery and atrophy of the right cerebral hemisphere; this was associated with left hemiparesis. Cerebral angiograms showed multiple bilateral vascular abnormalities. He had progression of the disorder, with recurrent strokes despite multiple surgeries, and slow intellectual deterioration. Residual features included headache, paresis, and visual defects. His 18-year-old sister, who was heterozygous for the mutation, had her fist transient ischemic attack at age 17 years. Brain MRI was normal, but cerebral angiograms showed unilateral changes consistent with moyamoya disease. The occlusive changes were not as severe as in her affected brother. Vascular surgery resulted in complete remission of TIAs. Family genetic analysis showed that both unaffected parents and an unaffected third sib also carried a heterozygous 14576G-A mutation. The report suggested a dosage effect for the 14576G-A variant.



SARDH
**[Sarcosinemia], 268900 (3), AR**
Sarcosinemia is characterized by an increased concentration of sarcosine in plasma and an increased excretion of sarcosine in urine. Sarcosine (N-methylglycine) is enzymatically formed from dimethylglycine by dimethylglycine dehydrogenase (EC 1.5.99.2) and converted to glycine by sarcosine dehydrogenase (SARDH; 604455; EC 1.5.99.1). Some reports have associated sarcosinemia with mental retardation and neurologic problems, but the disorder is most likely benign and unrelated to significant clinical problems (summary by Scott, 2001).
Gerritsen and Waisman (1966) found hypersarcosinemia and sarcosinuria in brother and sister with mild mental retardation and few other abnormalities. Abnormal increases in blood and urine sarcosine occurred in 2 other sibs, the mother, a maternal aunt, and the maternal grandmother (but not in the father) when sarcosine or its precursor dimethylglycine were administered.
Scott et al. (1970) reported a patient with sarcosinemia who had motor and mental retardation. They found, by loading tests, a decreased capacity to convert sarcosine to glycine, suggesting a deficiency of sarcosine dehydrogenase activity. They concluded that sarcosinemia is a benign metabolic state with no clinical manifestations. They viewed earlier impressions to the contrary as the result of bias of ascertainment, i.e., the discovery of sarcosinemia in children being investigated for abnormalities.
Levy et al. (1984) reported 4 patients with sarcosinemia who were detected by routine neonatal screening. All of the patients were mentally normal with no dysmorphic or other abnormal features.
Sewell et al. (1986) stated that 16 cases of sarcosinemia had been reported. They reported sarcosinemia in a retarded, amaurotic child of Turkish ancestry.
Meissner and Mayatepek (1997) reported the case of a 22-year-old woman who at the age of 5 years developed the first symptoms of sarcosinemia in the form of progressive loss of speech ability. One year later, she developed neurologic symptoms, including muscular hypotonia, pyramidal tract signs with unaffected sensation, paresis of the peroneal nerve, and subsequently ataxia. At that time, gross elevations of the concentration of sarcosine in plasma and urine were detected. By the age of 7 years she was no longer able to walk, finally resulting in complete tetraparesis at 15 years of age. At that time, she lost her speech totally, and bilateral optic atrophy became prominent. At the age of 18 years, she developed tonic-clonic seizures. MRI showed general cerebral atrophy. At the age of 20 years, echocardiography revealed biventricular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with functional infundibular pulmonic stenosis and reduced pulmonary outflow. The severe symptoms had not been reported previously in association with sarcosinemia. The possibility of a second disorder was raised since generally sarcosinemia is a completely benign condition. Meissner and Mayatepek (1997) commented that, since more than a single enzyme defect may be responsible for sarcosinemia, different clinical phenotypes may exist, including at least some patients with neurologic and other severe clinical symptoms.
Sarcosinemia and sarcosinuria also occur in some patients with type II glutaric aciduria (see 231675 and 231680) and with severe deficiency of folic acid (Scott, 2001).



PPP2R2B
**Spinocerebellar ataxia 12, 604326 (3), AD**
Holmes et al. (1999) identified a novel form of autosomal dominant spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA), termed SCA12, in a large pedigree, 'R,' of German descent. The phenotype was variable, but the prototypic phenotype was that of a classic spinocerebellar ataxia, and the disease resembled the spinocerebellar ataxias more closely than any other form of neurodegenerative disorder. Age of onset ranged from 8 to 55 years. Most individuals presented in the fourth decade with upper extremity tremor, progressing over several decades to include head tremor, gait ataxia, dysmetria, dysdiadokinesis, hyperreflexia, paucity of movement, abnormal eye movements, and, in the oldest subjects, dementia. MRI or CT scans of 5 cases indicated both cortical and cerebellar atrophy. O'Hearn et al. (2001) further characterized the phenotype of the 'R' pedigree and found that action tremor of the head and arms was the most distinguishing feature in comparison to other dominant SCAs.
Bahl et al. (2005) reported 25 patients from 20 Indian families with SCA12 who were all members of an endogamous group with origins in the state of Haryana in northern India. Five of the families had been previously reported by Srivastava et al. (2001). Age at onset ranged from 26 to 56 years (mean of 40.2 years), and most presented with upper extremity tremor. Other features included hyperreflexia, dysarthria, and mild or no gait ataxia. Two individuals had axial dystonia, and 3 had facial myokymia. Almost half of patients had a subclinical sensory or sensorimotor neuropathy. Brain MRI or CT scan showed cerebellar and cerebral cortical atrophy. Anticipation was not observed.



RYR2
**Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia 2, 600996 (3), AD**
Rampazzo et al. (1995) performed studies in a family with a 'concealed' form of ARVD; affected members showed no change in heart size and had normal standard ECG and functional capacity, but consistently showed effort-induced polymorphic ventricular tachycardias. Juvenile sudden death had occurred in 4 members. Postmortem examination of 2 of these subjects showed a right ventricle of normal size, with no overt abnormalities. However, large areas of fatty-fibrous replacement, mostly localized in the subepicardial layer of the right ventricle, were demonstrated histologically.
Scoote and Williams (2004) reviewed defects in cardiomyocyte calcium homeostasis and the associated arrhythmias.
**Ventricular tachycardia, catecholaminergic polymorphic, 1, 604772 (3), AD**
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is an arrhythmogenic disorder of the heart characterized by a reproducible form of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia induced by physical activity, stress, or catecholamine infusion, which can deteriorate into ventricular fibrillation. Patients present with recurrent syncope, seizures, or sudden death after physical activity or emotional stress. Typically, clinical cardiologic examinations, such as baseline ECG and echocardiogram, reveal mostly normal findings, and postmortem examinations, when carried out, have not disclosed any significant morphologic alterations in the fine structure of the heart, with the exception of mild fatty myocardial infiltration in a few patients. The hallmark of CPVT comprises ventricular arrhythmias of varying morphology not present under resting conditions but appearing only with physical exercise, excitement, or catecholamine administration. These arrhythmias are first seen as ventricular premature complexes, later in bigeminy, followed by bidirectional or polymorphic ventricular tachycardia, which eventually leads to ventricular fibrillation. CPVT can be inherited as an autosomal dominant or recessive trait. Clinical penetrance in this disease ranges from 25 to 100%, with an average of 70 to 80%. Syncope appears to be the first symptom in more than half of the patients. When untreated, mortality from CPVT is high, reaching 30 to 50% by the age of 30 years. Beta-blockers without sympathomimetic activity are clinically effective in the reduction of syncope, but implantation of an automatic internal defibrillator is occasionally needed in these patients (summary by Bhuiyan et al., 2007).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia
CPVT2 (611938) is caused by mutation in the CASQ2 gene (114251) on chromosome 1p13; CPVT3 (614021) has been mapped to chromosome 7p22-p14; CPVT4 (614916) is caused by mutation in the CALM1 gene (114180) on chromosome 14q32; CPVT5 (615441) is caused by mutation in the TRDN gene (603283) on chromosome 6q22; and CPVT6 (see 618782) is caused by mutation in the CALM3 gene (114183) on chromosome 19q13.
Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) occurring in the structurally intact heart was described by Coumel et al. (1978) and by Leenhardt et al. (1995) as a distinct clinical entity with manifestations in childhood and adolescence. Affected individuals present with syncopal events and with a distinctive pattern of highly reproducible, stress-related, bidirectional ventricular tachycardia in the absence of both structural heart disease and a prolonged QT interval. A family history of juvenile sudden death and stress-induced syncope is present in approximately one-third of cases. Swan et al. (1999) described 2 unrelated Finnish families with an autosomal dominant cardiac syndrome causing stress-induced polymorphic ventricular tachycardia and syncope in the absence of structural myocardial changes (see 192605). Of 24 affected individuals, 10 had succumbed, including 6 cases of sudden death; the 14 survivors showed evidence of the disease. Exercise stress test induced ventricular bigeminy or polymorphic ventricular tachycardia in affected individuals. Three children initially examined before 10 years of age developed arrhythmias during a 4-year follow-up. Administration of flecainide did not induce electrocardiographic abnormalities of the type seen in familial idiopathic ventricular fibrillation (603829). The cumulative cardiac mortality by the age of 30 years was 31%.
Priori et al. (2002) studied 30 probands with CPVT, 14 of whom were known to have a mutation in the RYR2 gene. Nine family members were identified as RYR2 mutation carriers, 5 of whom had exercise-induced arrhythmias at clinical evaluation and 4 of whom were phenotypically silent (incomplete penetrance). Syncope occurred in 26 of 30 probands and was the first sign of disease in 16 probands. Age at first manifestation extended into adulthood (7 of 30 probands); the authors suggested that the diagnosis of CPVT should include individuals of any age with adrenergically mediated asymptomatic ventricular tachycardia occurring in a structurally intact heart.
Scoote and Williams (2004) reviewed defects in cardiomyocyte calcium homeostasis and the associated arrhythmias.
Bhuiyan et al. (2007) studied 2 families with CPVT in which, in addition to exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias, affected individuals exhibited abnormalities in sinoatrial and atrioventricular node function, atrial fibrillation, and atrial standstill. Several affected individuals also developed left ventricular dysfunction and dilation.



CACNA1B
**?Dystonia 23, 614860 (3), AD**
Uitti and Maraganore (1993) reported a large family of German origin in which 5 individuals, including a pair of monozygotic twin brothers, had adult-onset cervical dystonia, typically during the fourth and fifth decades of life. Physical examination showed variable limitation of the neck, torticollis, and hypertrophy of the sternocleidomastoid muscles. Four patients had head tremor, and 3 had limb tremor. Five additional family members were diagnosed with possible cervical dystonia.
Groen et al. (2011) reported a 3-generation Dutch family in which 5 individuals had a movement disorder characterized by dystonia and myoclonus. The age at symptom onset ranged widely from 4 to 62 years. Symptoms included writer's cramp, dysphonia, torticollis, and foot dystonia. Two patients had generalized myoclonus, whereas the other 3 had myoclonus localized to the voice, face, trunk, or limbs. Three patients had action-induced myoclonus of the lower limbs, and 3 patients reported that the myoclonus responded to alcohol. Patients also showed high-frequency continuous myoclonus in the legs while standing, resulting in unsteadiness. Other more variable features included panic attacks and hyperventilation syndrome. Brain imaging was normal in 2 patients; 1 patient had mild cerebral and cerebellar atrophy. Electrophysiologic studies performed in 3 patients showed semirhythmic or irregular bursts, suggestive of a subcortical origin with possible cerebellar involvement. Groen et al. (2015) noted that 3 patients reported by Groen et al. (2015) had cardiac arrhythmias and attacks of painful limb cramps.



TRPC6
**Glomerulosclerosis, focal segmental, 2, 603965 (3), AD**
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a pathologic entity associated clinically with proteinuria, the nephrotic syndrome (NPHS), and progressive loss of renal function. It is a common cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD) (review by Meyrier, 2005).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis and nephrotic syndrome (NPHS), see FSGS1 (603278).
Winn et al. (1999, 1999) reported a 399-member Caucasian kindred of British heritage dating back 7 generations from the south of New Zealand in which 14 deceased individuals had had ESRD, 14 living family members were on dialysis or had undergone renal transplantation, and 3 individuals were found to have proteinuria greater than 3+ by qualitative urinalysis.



MYO9A
**Myasthenic syndrome, congenital, 24, presynaptic, 618198 (3), AR**
Bayram et al. (2016) reported a boy (patient BAB6499), born of unrelated parents (family HOU2431), who presented with distal arthrogryposis of the hands and feet, knee contractures, camptodactyly, and talipes equinovarus. Additional clinical details were limited, but Bayram et al. (2016) noted that arthrogryposis is often a secondary effect resulting from abnormalities in the neuromuscular system. O'Connor et al. (2016) noted that arthrogryposis may result from reduced fetal movements due to neuromuscular transmission defects in utero.
O'Connor et al. (2016) reported 3 patients from 2 unrelated families with CMS24. Patient 1 was a 4-year-old German girl, born of unrelated parents, who showed swallowing difficulties, proximal and distal muscle weakness, episodic apnea, respiratory failure, and ptosis in the neonatal period. Electrophysiologic studies showed abnormal jitter of the orbicularis oculi, suggesting a diagnosis of CMS. She may have had mild cognitive dysfunction and was tube-fed; brain imaging was normal. She responded positively to a combination of pyridostigmine and 3,4-DAP, showing marked improvements in motor and respiratory function. The second family was a consanguineous Kurdish family with 2 affected sibs. Decreased fetal movements were observed during the pregnancies, and both patients showed ptosis, swallowing difficulties, and hypotonia in the first months of life. They had delayed motor development with walking at 3 to 5 years of age, and ocular abnormalities, including nystagmus, ophthalmoplegia, and oculomotor apraxia. Respiratory crises occurred with infections. One patient was noted to have learning disabilities and did not speak at age 5 years. EMG showed abnormal jitter and there was a decremental response on repetitive nerve stimulation, consistent with a diagnosis of CMS. The patients responded well to pyridostigmine treatment. Family history revealed that the patients had 4 sibs who died in the first year of life with respiratory failure and hypotonia. Muscle and nerve biopsies were not performed.



RIPK1
**Immunodeficiency 57, 618108 (3), AR**
Cuchet-Lourenco et al. (2018) reported 4 patients from 3 unrelated consanguineous families of Middle Eastern descent with a primary immunodeficiency. The patients presented in the first year of life with recurrent infections, including bacterial, viral, and fungal. Features included diarrhea, vomiting, hepatosplenomegaly, mouth ulcers, perianal abscesses, chronic lung disease with bronchiectasis, and failure to thrive. Three patients developed gastritis and features of chronic inflammatory bowel disease in infancy, whereas the fourth developed inflammatory bowel disease at age 4 years. Biopsies of the gastrointestinal tract showed chronic active inflammation, ulceration, and crypt abscesses. All patients also developed inflammatory polyarthritis, but only 1 had a skin rash associated with lymphocytic vasculitis. Organisms identified in patients included cytomegalovirus, Mycobacterium avium intracellulare, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, respiratory syncytial virus, herpes simplex, Aspergillus, and Candida. Laboratory studies showed variable T-cell lymphopenia in all patients, reduced NK cells in 3 patients, and decreased B cells with variable hypogammaglobulinemia in 2. T-cell proliferative responses and neutrophil oxidative burst activity were normal. Three patients underwent hematopoietic stem cell transplant, but 2 patients died at ages 12 and 13 years in the weeks following transplant. The third patient (P2) was still alive 5 years after transplant and was doing well with resolution of arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease. The fourth patient (P4), who did not undergo stem cell transplant, was alive and maintained on IVIG. In 1 family, 3 sibs had died of profuse bloody diarrhea between 6 and 12 months of age.



KANK2
**Nephrotic syndrome, type 16, 617783 (3), AR**
Gee et al. (2015) reported 3 children from 2 unrelated families with onset of nephrotic syndrome between 2 and 3 years of age. Two sibs, born of consanguineous Arab parents (family A982), had steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome, whereas the unrelated patient of European descent (family A1751) had steroid-dependent nephrotic syndrome and hematuria. Renal biopsy of all 3 patients showed minimal change disease. Additional clinical details were not provided, but none had extrarenal manifestations.
**Palmoplantar keratoderma and woolly hair, 616099 (3), AR**
Ramot et al. (2014) studied 2 consanguineous Arab families with keratoderma and woolly hair, 1 of which (family 1) had previously been reported (family B) by Djabali et al. (2002). All 7 patients presented with a variable degree of striate palmoplantar keratoderma, which was generally more severe on the soles. Leukonychia was more pronounced on the fingernails than toenails. Scalp hair, body hair, eyebrows, and eyelashes were sparse, and 2 patients also exhibited woolly hair. The fifth toes showed variable degrees of pseudoainhum, ranging from external rotation to a deep sulcus at the digitoplantar fold, accompanied by a bulbous appearance of the distal toe. Symptoms appeared to be more severe with advancing age, suggesting a progressive course of the disease. The patients reported no dyspnea, syncope, or weakness, and there was no family history of early sudden death. Electrocardiography was normal in all patients, and echocardiography in the oldest patient from each family was also normal. Skin biopsy from 1 patient showed nonepidermolytic keratoderma with regular acanthosis and a normal granular layer.



FKBP5
**{Major depressive disorder and accelerated response to antidepressant drug treatment}, 608516 (3)**
According to the DSM-IV-TR (American Psychiatric Association, 2000), major depressive disorder is characterized by one or more major depressive episodes without a history of manic, mixed, or hypomanic episodes. A major depressive episode is characterized by at least 2 weeks during which there is a new onset or clear worsening of either depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure in nearly all activities. Four additional symptoms must also be present including changes in appetite, weight, sleep, and psychomotor activity; decreased energy; feelings of worthlessness or guilt; difficulty thinking, concentrating, or making decisions; or recurrent thoughts of death or suicidal ideation, plans, or attempts. The episode must be accompanied by distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.
Major depressive disorder is commonly recurrent and can be lethal. Up to 15% of individuals with severe major depressive disorder die by suicide. There is a 4-fold increase in death rate of individuals with major depressive disorder over 55 years of age (American Psychiatric Association, 2000).



IGF2R
**Hepatocellular carcinoma, somatic, 114550 (3)**
Hepatocellular carcinoma is the major histologic type of malignant primary liver neoplasm. It is the fifth most common cancer and the third most common cause of death from cancer worldwide. The major risk factors for HCC are chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, prolonged dietary aflatoxin exposure, alcoholic cirrhosis, and cirrhosis due to other causes. Hepatoblastomas comprise 1 to 2% of all malignant neoplasms of childhood, most often occurring in children under 3 years of age. Hepatoblastomas are thought to be derived from undifferentiated hepatocytes (Taniguchi et al., 2002).
Primary cancer of the liver in 3 brothers was described by Kaplan and Cole (1965) and by Hagstrom and Baker (1968). In these patients there was no recognized preexisting liver disease. Denison et al. (1971) described 2 adult brothers who died of primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Both had micronodular cirrhosis with features of subacute progressive viral hepatitis. Australia antigen was demonstrated in the brother in whom it was sought. Their father had died much earlier of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatoblastoma has been described in sibs (Fraumeni et al., 1969; Napoli and Campbell, 1977; Ito et al., 1987).
See 231100 for description of liver cancer as a complication of giant cell hepatitis of infancy. Familial liver cell carcinoma might also have its explanation in alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (613490), hemochromatosis (235200), and tyrosinemia (276700).
Jiang et al. (2019) used proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling to characterize 110 paired tumor and nontumor tissues of clinical early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma related to hepatitis B virus infection. The quantitative proteomic data highlight heterogeneity in early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma. The cohort was stratified into subtypes S-I, S-II, and S-III, each of which has a different clinical outcome. S-III, which is characterized by disrupted cholesterol homeostasis, is associated with the lowest overall rate of survival and the greatest risk of a poor prognosis after first-line surgery.



KCNE1
**Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome 2, 612347 (3), AR**
The Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome is an autosomal recessive syndrome of abnormal cardiac ventricular repolarization with prolonged QT interval and bilateral congenital deafness.
For a general description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome, see 220400.
**Long QT syndrome 5, 613695 (3), AD**
Congenital long QT syndrome is electrocardiographically characterized by a prolonged QT interval and polymorphic ventricular arrhythmias (torsade de pointes). These cardiac arrhythmias may result in recurrent syncope, seizure, or sudden death (Jongbloed et al., 1999).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of long QT syndrome, see LQT1 (192500).



ZNF365
**{Nephrolithiasis, uric acid, susceptibility to}, 605990 (3)**



CDH19
**Mitral valve prolapse 2, 607829 (3), AD**
Patients with MVP2 have nonsyndromic MVP of variable severity inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.
For a general phenotypic description and discussion of genetic heterogeneity of mitral valve prolapse, see MVP1 (157700).
Freed et al. (2003) examined a large 5-generation family in which at least 12 members had mitral valve prolapse with no extracardiac manifestations of connective tissue abnormalities or Marfan syndrome (154700).
Durst et al. (2015) studied 2 unrelated families with MVP due to mutation in the DCHS1 gene (see MOLECULAR GENETICS). In the first family, a brother and sister exhibited classic MVP. The brother underwent mitral valve repair for severe regurgitation at age 21 years, with resected valve tissue showing myxomatous degeneration. The proband's 27-year-old sister had thickened leaflets and moderate regurgitation. Their mother and maternal grandfather both had mild MVP. In the second family, the female proband had moderate to severe heart failure due to severe mitral regurgitation with posterior leaflet prolapse which was surgically repaired at age 72 years. She had 1 son and 1 daughter who were also diagnosed with MVP, whereas another son had indeterminate MVP status, due to tethering of his leaflets down into the left ventricular cavity by mild left inferior wall hypokinesis, which masks leaflet prolapse motion towards the left atrium.
**Van Maldergem syndrome 1, 601390 (3), AR**
Van Maldergem syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by intellectual disability, typical craniofacial features, auditory malformations resulting in hearing loss, and skeletal and limb malformations. Some patients have renal hypoplasia. Brain MRI typically shows periventricular nodular heterotopia (summary by Cappello et al., 2013).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Van Maldergem Syndrome
See also VMLDS2 (615546), caused by mutation in the FAT4 gene (612411) on chromosome 4q28.
Van Maldergem et al. (1992) described a mentally retarded girl with facial abnormalities (tele- and epicanthus, ptosis, broad nasal bridge, inverted W-shaped upper lip, everted lower lip, macrostomia, malformed ears), abnormal extremities (camptodactyly, genu recurvatum, interdigital webbing), and hyperlaxity of major joints. The same complex was found by Zampino et al. (1994) in a 5-year-old girl. MRI of the brain in the latter patient showed hypoplastic optic chiasm, inferiorly beaked frontal horns, and hypoplasia of the posterior part of the corpus callosum. Both cases were sporadic. Paternal age was 38 years in one case (Van Maldergem et al., 1992) and 36 years in the other (Zampino et al., 1994). Zampino et al. (1994) proposed the term cerebrofacioarticular syndrome for this complex. Mansour et al. (2012) provided follow-up of the patient reported by Van Maldergem et al. (1992). At age 32 years, she had autism with hand stereotypies, no language development, severe intellectual disability, and self-injurious behavior. She had poor growth, no breast development or secondary sexual characteristics, and no menarche.
Mansour et al. (2012) reported 4 patients from 3 families with Van Maldergem syndrome-1 (patients 2, 3, 4, and 5). All patients had a distinctive facial appearance that included large fontanels, maxillary hypoplasia, micrognathia, flat face, blepharophimosis, telecanthus, broad nasal bridge, thickening of the nasal alae, and microtia and atresia of the external auditory meatus resulting in hearing loss. Patients showed neonatal hypotonia, intellectual disability, poor growth and feeding, and respiratory problems due to tracheomalacia. Several patients required a tracheostomy. Skeletal abnormalities included osteopenia, thickened skull base and frontal bones, narrow thorax, short clavicles, subluxation of the radial heads, and hand and feet abnormalities with clinodactyly due to flexion deformities. More variable features included small kidneys, anal stenosis, anteriorly placed anus, sacral dimples, abnormal teeth, high-arched palate, choanal atresia, thick gums, and hypospadias. Brain MRI showed subependymal and subcortical neuronal heterotopia, often with a dysmorphic corpus callosum or simplified gyral pattern, consistent with a neuronal migration defect. None of the patients had seizures.



GGT2
**[Gamma-glutamyltransferase, familial high serum], 137181 (2)**
GGT2 belongs to the gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT; EC 2.3.2.2) gene family. GGT is a membrane-bound extracellular enzyme that cleaves gamma-glutamyl peptide bonds in glutathione and other peptides and transfers the gamma-glutamyl moiety to acceptors. GGT is also key to glutathione homeostasis because it provides substrates for glutathione synthesis (Heisterkamp et al., 2008).





NRXN1
**Pitt-Hopkins-like syndrome 2, 614325 (3), AR**
Zweier et al. (2009) reported an 18-year-old girl with a mental retardation syndrome resembling Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS; 610954). She had normal growth parameters but severe mental retardation, acquired walking at age 2 years, and showed developmental regression after the first years. She also had hyperbreathing and autistic behavior. Seizures were not present, and brain MRI was normal. Other features included decreased reflexes in the upper extremities, constipation, and mild facial dysmorphism, including broad mouth, strabismus, and protruding tongue with drooling.
Harrison et al. (2011) reported 2 sisters, born of unrelated Caucasian parents, with a severe mental retardation syndrome characterized by onset of epileptic encephalopathy at age 4 and 6 months, respectively, with loss of early developmental skills. Both had hypotonia and poor feeding in early infancy. The older sister began to walk with a wide-based unsteady gait at age 5 years, whereas the younger sister never learned to walk. At age 16 years, the older sister had a complex seizure disorder with drop attacks, tonic-clonic seizures, atypical absences, and myoclonic jerks. Development was very slow, with occasional episodes of regression associated with an increase of seizures. She had very limited speech and several behavioral abnormalities, including self-harm and repetitive movements. At age 11 years, the younger sister had severe myoclonic epilepsy with occasional atypical absences, and slow developmental progress without episodes of regression. The older sister had episodes of hyperventilation, and the younger had breath-holding spells. Other features in both girls included an abnormal sleep-wake cycle, stereotyped behavior, gastroesophageal reflux with poor growth, constipation, early-onset puberty, pulmonary stenosis, and scoliosis. Brain MRI was normal in the older sister.
**{Schizophrenia, susceptibility to, 17}, 614332 (3)**
Deletions at 2p16.3 involving exons of NRXN1 are associated with susceptibility to autism, schizophrenia (SCZD17), developmental delay, intellectual disability, and dysmorphic features. The phenotype is highly variable and shows incomplete penetrance (summary by Dabell et al., 2013).
For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of schizophrenia, see 181500.
Dabell et al. (2013) identified 34 probands with heterozygous deletions of chromosome 2p16.3 involving exons of the NRXN1 gene from a large cohort of 30,065 samples submitted for oligonucleotide-based array covering the NRXN1 gene who were referred for intellectual disability, developmental delay, and/or multiple congenital anomalies. Clinical features were available for 27 patients who had different deletions ranging in size from 40 to 586 kb. The vast majority of the deletions affected the NRXN1-alpha isoforms. There was wide phenotypic variability, but at least 4 features were shared by the majority of patients: developmental delay, speech delay, abnormal behavior including autism spectrum disorder, and some degree of dysmorphism. In addition, 16% of patients had seizures, and heart and skeletal anomalies were sometimes observed. Eight parents of these patients also carried the deletion, some of whom showed neurocognitive defects and some of whom were normal, indicating incomplete penetrance. The frequency of 2p16.3 deletions in the probands (0.11%) was significantly higher than that observed in controls (0.02%) (p = 6.08 x 10(-7)).



MBD5
**Mental retardation, autosomal dominant 1, 156200 (3), AD**
Chromosome 2q23.1 Deletion Syndrome
Wagenstaller et al. (2007) described a boy with severe mental retardation who additionally had a sandal gap between the first and second toe, but no facial dysmorphic features. He showed retarded motor development and had febrile seizures at age 8 months and seizures without fever starting at age 16 months. The boy was hypoactive, and social interactions were limited.
Jaillard et al. (2009) reported 2 unrelated 10-year-old boys, both born to nonconsanguineous French parents, with 2q23.1 microdeletion. Both boys had severe psychomotor retardation and language impairment, microcephaly, seizures, and ataxia.
Van Bon et al. (2010) reported 11 unrelated patients with 2q23.1 deletions, including 9 patients reported for the first time. One of the patients had a similarly affected sib. All were mentally retarded with pronounced speech delay. Additional abnormalities included short stature, seizures, microcephaly, and coarse facies with broad forehead and everted lower lip. The majority of cases presented with stereotypic repetitive behavior, a disturbed sleep pattern, and a broad-based ataxic gait. Less common features included hyperphagia, short hands, and short fifth digits. These features led to the initial clinical impression of Angelman syndrome (105830), Rett syndrome (RTT; 312750), or Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS; 182290) in several patients.
Williams et al. (2010) reported 2 additional unrelated patients with chromosome 2q23.1 deletion syndrome. The patients had severe developmental and cognitive delay, minimal speech, infantile hypotonia, seizures, microcephaly, mild craniofacial dysmorphism such as wide mouth and tented upper lip, behavioral disorders, and short stature.
From a large international multicenter collaboration, Talkowski et al. (2011) ascertained 65 patients with heterozygous deletion (63 cases) or translocation (2 cases) involving the MBD5 gene. An analysis of 48 phenotypic features showed that most (81.2%) of the features of 2q23.1 deletion syndrome were consistent between both MBD5-specific alterations and larger deletions. All patients had developmental delay, motor delay, seizures, language impairment, and various behavioral problems, including short attention span, self-injurious behavior, aggression, and autistic-like features. Common craniofacial anomalies included thick or arched eyebrows, thin upper lip, widely spaced teeth, and small chin. Eye abnormalities included esotropia, myopia, astigmatism, hypermetropia, and poor vision, and nasal abnormalities included large prominent nose in older individuals and small bulbous nose in younger individuals.
Mullegama et al. (2015) reviewed 74 cases with either MBD5-specific deletions or 2q23.1 deletions, published either as case reports or series. Developmental delay and motor delay were present in 100% of those assessed, while seizures were seen in 85% and severe language impairment in 94%. Infantile hypotonia and feeding difficulties were present in more than 85% assessed while autistic-like behavioral problems were reported in 98%. Attention span difficulties were present in 100%, and sleep disturbances in 79%. Close to 70% had short stature; craniofacial abnormalities included microcephaly in 61%, broad forehead in 70%, and arched/thick eyebrows in 79%.
Chromosome 2q23.1 Duplication Syndrome
Chung et al. (2012) reported 2 patients with developmental delay, hypotonia, and autistic features who had duplications of chromosome region 2q23.1-q23.2. Patient 1, a girl, was born at term to healthy nonconsanguineous parents. The father was of Scottish descent and the mother of African-Caribbean and British descent. Birth weight was at the third percentile, and the patient was hospitalized for 2 weeks with poor feeding and hypotonia. Outer canthal and interpupillary distances were increased, but inner canthal distance was normal. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable except for hypotonia. She walked independently at 18 months of age and said her first word at age 2 years. She was diagnosed with global developmental delay at age 4 years. She was diagnosed with autism at age 8 and had a total vocabulary of 20 words. At age 17, examination showed head circumference at the 25 percentile, low anterior hairline, arched eyebrows with lateral ptosis, and bulbous nasal tip. Aggressive behavior was present. Hearing and vision were normal, and she did not have seizures. Patient 2 was an 8-year-old male of nonconsanguineous Caucasian descent referred for genetic evaluation because of developmental delay and autistic features. He had shown poor neonatal feeding, hypotonia, and in the first year of life had experienced gastroesophageal reflux and recurrent vomiting. He had global developmental delay and was unable to walk or talk until the age of 2 years. At age 8 years he performed at the kindergarten level for reading and writing. All growth parameters were above the 98th percentile at 8 years of age. He had subtle facial asymmetry, right hemifacial microsomia, strabismus, high-arched palate, and dental crowding. His nose was long and tubular with a prominent tip, and he had bilateral fifth finger clinodactyly. Seizures were not present.
Autosomal Dominant Mental Retardation 1
Carvill et al. (2013) reported a 20-year-old woman with severe mental retardation and autism spectrum disorder associated with epileptic encephalopathy who had a de novo heterozygous mutation in the MBD5 gene (611472.0002). In infancy, she had delayed development and onset of tonic-clonic seizures at age 6 months. She later developed absence seizures, focal dyscognitive seizures, focal seizures, and tonic seizures associated with multiple EEG abnormalities. The report expanded the phenotype associated with MBD5 mutations.



GNAS
**ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia, 219080 (3), Somatic mutation**
ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (AIMAH) is an endogenous form of adrenal Cushing syndrome characterized by multiple bilateral adrenocortical nodules that cause a striking enlargement of the adrenal glands. Although some familial cases have been reported, the vast majority of AIMAH cases are sporadic. Patients typically present in the fifth and sixth decades of life, approximately 10 years later than most patients with other causes of Cushing syndrome (Swain et al., 1998; Christopoulos et al., 2005).
Approximately 10 to 15% of adrenal Cushing syndrome is due to primary bilateral ACTH-independent adrenocortical pathology. The 2 main subtypes are AIMAH and primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD, see 610489), which is often a component of the Carney complex (160980) and associated with mutations in the PRKAR1A gene (188830) on chromosome 17q23-q24. AIMAH is rare, representing less than 1% of endogenous causes of Cushing syndrome (Swain et al., 1998; Christopoulos et al., 2005).
See also ACTH-independent Cushing syndrome (615830) due to somatic mutation in the PRKACA gene (601639).
Cushing 'disease' (219090) is an ACTH-dependent disorder caused in most cases by pituitary adenomas that secrete excessive ACTH.
Genetic Heterogeneity of ACTH-Independent Macronodular Adrenal Hyperplasia
AIMAH2 (615954) is caused by germline mutation of 1 allele of the ARMC5 gene (615549) coupled with a somatic mutation in the other allele.
Kirschner et al. (1964) first reported AIMAH in a 40-year-old woman with long-standing Cushing syndrome (Christopoulos et al., 2005).
Findlay et al. (1993) reported a mother and daughter who each presented with clinical features of Cushing syndrome at age 38 years and were found to have AIMAH.
Minami et al. (1996) reported 2 Japanese sibs with Cushing syndrome due to AIMAH. The proband was a 69-year-old woman who presented with easy bruising, fatigability, muscle weakness, hypertension, and cognitive decline. She had truncal obesity, 'moon facies,' muscle wasting, and pretibial edema. Serum cortisol was elevated and did not respond to dexamethasone; CT scan showed bilateral adrenal enlargement. The patient died of subarachnoid hemorrhage and postmortem examination confirmed AIMAH. Family history revealed an older brother with AIMAH who had died postoperatively. Two additional sibs showed bilateral enlargement of the adrenal glands as well as impaired response to dexamethasone, although they were not clinically Cushingoid.
Swain et al. (1998) reported 9 unrelated patients with AIMAH who underwent curative bilateral adrenalectomy. The mean age was 56 years. All patients had increased serum cortisol, decreased serum ACTH, and failed to show suppression of cortisol excretion following dexamethasone administration. All patients except 1 had hypertension; subtle signs or symptoms consistent with Cushing syndrome were noted in patients' histories dating back up to 20 years. Pathologic examination showed bilateral adrenal cortical nodules that were yellow and ranged in size from 1 to 4.2 cm within enlarged adrenal glands weighing from 16.7 to 218 g combined. Microscopic analysis showed hyperplastic nodules composed of clear cells in cord-like arrangements and compact eosinophilic cells occasionally interspersed with atrophic nonnodular cortex. Swain et al. (1998) cited studies (Aiba et al., 1991; Sasano et al., 1994; Morioka et al., 1997; Koizumi et al., 1994) indicating that AIMAH nodules show impaired steroidogenesis, suggesting a primary intrinsic alteration in the adrenal cells. Importantly, none of the patients developed Nelson syndrome (pituitary tumor) after adrenalectomy and none showed any sign of malignancy. Swain et al. (1998) concluded that AIMAH is a distinct and legitimate disease entity.
Doppman et al. (2000) reported the radiographic findings of 11 patients with AIMAH and noted that the adrenal glands are often massive with combined weights up to 300 g and individual nodules up to 5 cm in diameter. One male patient reportedly had a brother with surgically-proven AIMAH. The authors commented that the clinical manifestations of Cushing syndrome are mild in many patients with AIMAH.
Nies et al. (2002) reported a family in which 3 female members had clinically symptomatic AIMAH. Three deceased female family members were reportedly affected. Although the father, who was determined to be an obligate carrier, had no overt symptoms, his adrenal glands showed nodular hyperplasia and he had impaired cortisol suppression on dexamethasone administration. Nies et al. (2002) suggested autosomal dominant inheritance.
Lee et al. (2005) reported 2 Asian sisters who developed AIMAH at ages 46 and 58 years, respectively. Both patients had typical Cushingoid features, including 'moon facies,' dorsocervical fat pad ('buffalo hump'), and central obesity; 1 had purple striae. Both had increased serum cortisol and bilateral adrenal masses, and both had meningiomas, which may or may not have been related. Pituitary tumors were not present.
**McCune-Albright syndrome, somatic, mosaic, 174800 (3)**
Activating or gain-of-function GNAS1 mutations in patients with the McCune-Albright syndrome are present in the mosaic state, resulting from a postzygotic somatic mutation appearing early in the course of development which yields a monoclonal population of mutated cells within variously affected tissues. The nonmosaic state for most activating mutations is presumably lethal to the embryo. The disorder is characterized clinically by the classic triad of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia (POFD), cafe-au-lait skin pigmentation, and peripheral precocious puberty. However, the disorder is clinically heterogeneous and can include various other endocrinologic anomalies such as thyrotoxicosis, pituitary gigantism, and Cushing syndrome (219080) (Lumbroso et al., 2004).
This disorder is called McCune-Albright syndrome or simply Albright syndrome, but should not be confused with pseudohypoparathyroidism (103580), which includes a constellation of features termed Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO). The predominant features of MAS occur in 3 areas: the bony skeleton, the skin, and the endocrine system. In all 3 systems, the extent of the abnormality and, in the case of the endocrine system, the nature of the abnormality, are highly variable from case to case, depending on the specific tissues involved in the mosaicism and the extent of involvement.
Skeletal
No bone is spared. There is a strong tendency to asymmetry. Involvement of the skull and facial bones can be striking, and in the case of these bones also, asymmetry is the rule. Pathologic fracture or bone deformity may be presenting manifestations and pseudarthrosis occurs frequently. Deafness and blindness can result from impingement of the bony process on the cranial foramina. Shepherd's crook deformity of the proximal femur is particularly characteristic of the bony involvement. (The bone lesions of neurofibromatosis are usually less extensive than are those in polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, but may be difficult to distinguish on radiologic grounds alone.)
Hypophosphatemic osteomalacia ('rickets') has been observed in some cases of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia. Dent and Gertner (1976) suggested that this may represent a situation comparable to 'tumor rickets' which is associated with mesenchymal tumors and regresses when the tumor is removed. McArthur et al. (1979) described 4 patients with Albright syndrome, hypophosphatemia, and inappropriately low renal tubular reabsorption of phosphate. Three of the patients had radiologic evidence of rickets. They postulated that a substance elaborated by the dysplastic bone interfered with phosphate reabsorption in the renal tubule.
Kaplan et al. (1988) reported the case of a 31-year-old woman with this disorder in whom bone lesions progressed rapidly during pregnancy. A study of these lesions showed the presence of estrogen and progesterone receptors in osteogenic cells. Whether estrogen receptors are unique to the McCune-Albright syndrome or, alternatively, a property of any activated, dedifferentiated, or neoplastic bone cells is unclear.
Viljoen et al. (1988) described a severely affected man, aged about 30, with massive craniofacial hyperostosis. They raised the question of whether this represents the severe end of the scale for polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, or whether it is a distinct entity. It seems likely that this was a severe expression of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia (McCune-Albright syndrome). McKusick (1988) studied a patient with severe craniofacial hyperostosis who had other, more characteristic features of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia, including cafe-au-lait pigmentation, which was absent in the case of Viljoen et al. (1988); this patient was later found by Schwindinger et al. (1992) to have a mutation in the GNAS1 gene (139320.0009). There are other definite cases of patients with very severe craniofacial involvement (Nager et al., 1982; Nager and Holliday, 1984). Such is also evident from inspection of the descriptions in the classic monograph of Albright and Reifenstein (1948). For example, they produced a picture (their Figure 145) of a skeleton thought by von Recklinghausen (1891) to represent hyperparathyroidism (osteitis fibrosa generalisata of von Recklinghausen). That this was severe Albright polyostotic fibrous dysplasia was suggested by the shepherd's crook deformity of the femora and the asymmetric bulge of the occipital area of the skull. Taconis (1988) reported 2 cases of osteosarcomatous transformation, 1 in the skull of a 25-year-old man and 1 in the iliac bone of a 38-year-old man.
Taconis (1988) stated that the incidence of malignancy of the bone lesions may be lower than previously suggested. Malignant transformation occurs in both monostotic and polyostotic disease but is more common in the latter form. Although radiation therapy is often an inciting cause, this was not the case in either of these patients, who had received no radiation therapy.
Candeliere et al. (1995) reported a 7-year-old boy with McCune-Albright syndrome in whom they identified high levels of expression of the FOS (164810) oncogene in bone lesions. Increased expression of the FOS oncogene was presumably a consequence of increased adenylate cyclase activity and may have been important in the pathogenesis of the bone lesions. Genetic analysis identified the R201H mutation in the GNAS1 gene (139320.0013).
Skin
The involvement of the skin consists predominantly of large cafe-au-lait spots with irregular margins, giving them a 'coast of Maine' configuration as opposed to the more regularly outlined 'coast of California' cafe-au-lait spots of neurofibromatosis (162200). Like the bony lesions, the pigmentary lesions of the skin may be limited predominantly to one side and stop sharply at the midline. The nape of the neck is a commonly involved site. (The cafe-au-lait spots of neurofibromatosis are for the most part smaller, more regular, and more uniformly distributed, and are accompanied by axillary freckling and usually by skin tumors.)
Endocrine
The leading endocrinologic feature is precocious puberty, which occurs in over half of female cases. Menstruation may occur in the first months of life. Precocious puberty has been reported also in males with this syndrome; testicular biopsy has revealed the full process of spermatogenesis with mature sperm in patients as young as 6 years (Benedict, 1966; Giovannelli et al., 1978). Probably the second most common endocrinopathy is hyperthyroidism (Lichtenstein and Jaffe, 1942; Hamilton and Maloof, 1973). Excessive secretion of growth hormone (GH1; 139250) with gigantism, hyperadrenocorticism with Cushing syndrome, and gynecomastia have been observed. In specific instances, it has been demonstrated that the Cushing syndrome is due to multinodular change in the adrenals and the hyperthyroidism to multinodular toxic goiter (Hamilton and Maloof, 1973).
Falconer et al. (1942) reported pituitary gigantism in association with McCune-Albright syndrome. Wrong (1992) stated that he saw this patient, a boy born in Nottingham in 1930, in 1954; the patient was still alive, though severely disabled by bone disease, in the late 1960s at the age of almost 40. Premawardhana et al. (1992) described a 26-year-old woman with acromegaly due to a pituitary adenoma who developed secondary hypothyroidism and hypoadrenalism, in a setting of McCune-Albright syndrome. Cremonini et al. (1992) described acromegaly and hyperprolactinemia due to pituitary adenoma in a 35-year-old woman with McCune-Albright syndrome.
Malchoff et al. (1994) reported a 27-year-old woman with McCune-Albright syndrome who had an unusual clinical course. She presented at the age of 3 years with vaginal bleeding, had breast development at age 4 years, and had a second episode of vaginal bleeding at age 5 years 7 months. She had no pigmentary skin lesions, and 2 sets of radiographs of the chest, pelvis, skull, and long bones were normal. She was treated for 24 months with medroxyprogesterone acetate, and precocity resolved. She progressed normally through puberty, starting at age 10 years, and had normal menses, starting at age 12 years. At age 25 years, she delivered a normal daughter. A chest x-ray at age 27 years after minor trauma identified a single lesion of fibrous dysplasia in the left seventh rib. Radiographs of other bones were normal. Studies of the GNAS1 gene showed an R201H mutation.
Tinschert et al. (1999) reported a 37-year-old man with McCune-Albright syndrome causing gigantism and fibrous dysplasia with hypersecretion of growth hormone and prolactin (176760), with no evidence of pituitary tumor. The patient had an R201H mutation which ranged from 0% in buccal mucosa, blood, and skin melanocytes to 45% in a frozen section of the middle nasal concha.
Coutant et al. (2001) reported a 3.8-year-old boy with McCune-Albright syndrome associated with abnormal prepubertal testis enlargement and no sexual precocity. Other endocrine tests showed excessive GH secretion and moderate adrenal androgen hypersecretion. These findings were consistent with the occurrence of an activating mutation of the GNAS1 gene mainly expressed in Sertoli cells and weakly expressed or absent in Leydig cells. Abnormal prepubertal testicular enlargement extends the clinical spectrum of MAS, suggesting that determination of serum inhibin B (see 147290) and anti-mullerian hormone (600957) should be considered in boys with this syndrome. DNA sequence analysis from bone and testis tissues detected the R201H mutation.
Akintoye et al. (2002) estimated the prevalence of GH excess in MAS, characterized the clinical and endocrine manifestations, and described the response to treatment. Twelve patients (21%) had GH excess, based on failure to suppress serum GH on oral glucose tolerance test. Vision and hearing deficits were more common in patients with GH excess (33%) than in those without (4%). Patients with a history of precocious puberty and GH excess who had reached skeletal maturity achieved normal adult height despite a history of early epiphyseal fusion. All 9 patients tested had an increase in serum GH after TRH (613879), 11 of 12 (92%) had hyperprolactinemia, and all 8 tested had detectable or elevated nighttime GH levels. Pituitary adenoma was detected in 4 of 12 (33%) patients. GH excess is common in MAS and results in a distinct clinical phenotype characterized by inappropriately normal stature, TRH responsiveness, prolactin (176760) cosecretion, small or absent pituitary tumors, a consistent but inadequate response to treatment with cabergoline, and an intermediate response to long-acting octreotide.
Laven et al. (2001) presented the first longitudinal assessment of ovarian dysfunction in an adult patient with McCune-Albright syndrome. Their report provided evidence for persistent autonomous unilateral ovarian dysfunction during early adulthood in McCune-Albright syndrome not compatible with normal fertility. Laven et al. (2004) presented a case of an adult MAS patient with persistent unilateral autonomous ovarian activity whose ovarian and endometrial function was restored by removal of the affected ovary.
Obuobie et al. (2001) studied the GH and insulin-like growth hormone I (IGF1; 147440) profiles in a patient with confirmed McCune-Albright syndrome and GH hypersecretion throughout a successful pregnancy and postpartum period. Prepregnancy, the IGF I level was 60.6 nmol/L (normal, 18.0-43.1) and the daytime GH profile measured using assay A was 9.6-14.0 mU/L. At 13 weeks' gestation there was a decline of IGF I to 33.9 nmol/L and in the daytime GH profile (assay A) to 5.4-6.8 mU/L. At 24 weeks, IGF I had risen to 51.6 nmol/L. At 36 weeks, IGF I was still elevated at 56.6 nmol/L, with a daytime GH profile of 16.6-17.7 mU/L using assay A. At 12 weeks postpartum, the daytime GH profile with assay B was 5.6-8.6 mU/L. The authors concluded that GH suppression during pregnancy in acromegaly associated with McCune-Albright syndrome is best shown with assay B, which discriminates between GH and human placental lactogen (HPL; 150200). They also stated that GH secretion in a pregnant acromegalic with the McCune-Albright syndrome may not be entirely autonomous, as seen in classic acromegaly, but may be associated with a degree of negative feedback control that could be exerted by a circulating factor of placental origin, probably HPL or placental GH (GH2; 139240).
DiGeorge (1975) reviewed unusual features of the syndrome and the evidence that the endocrinopathy represents autonomous function of the endocrine glands. Two main hypotheses had been stated: (1) excessive secretion of the hypothalamic releasing hormones is involved in the endocrinopathy of this disorder (Hall and Warrick, 1972); and (2) this disorder represents multiple, circumscribed embryonic alterations in a variety of tissues resulting from clones of cells characterized by autonomous behavior, and perhaps aberrant behavior, toward otherwise normal stimuli. The latter hypothesis appeared to be the more compatible with the skeletal, cutaneous, and endocrinologic features and with the mosaic hypothesis of Happle (1986); its validity was proved by demonstration of mosaicism for mutations in the GNAS1 gene.
Majzoub and Scully (1993) described a 6-year-old boy who had apocrine sweat, facial acne, Tanner stage 2 pubic hair, and midpubertal-sized testes and penis, all indicative of precocious puberty, in association with osseous changes of this disorder.
A patient, aged 50 years, with McCune-Albright syndrome had a large syrinx (syringomyelia) causing neurologic manifestations in the arms and legs (McKusick, 1988). Because of a linear midline pigmentation in the high cervical area posteriorly, in the same area of the syrinx, the possibility can be raised that the syrinx, which extended from C2 to T11, was a primary manifestation of the syndrome. The patient also had extensive involvement of the base of the skull with Arnold-Chiari syndrome (i.e., extension of cerebellar tissue through the foramen magnum). He had had hyperthyroidism, as reported by Hamilton and Maloof (1973). (The same patient had severe craniofacial hyperostosis and was demonstrably mosaic for a specific GNAS1 mutation, i.e., arg201-to-his (139320.0009).)
Abs et al. (1990) described a case of atypical McCune-Albright syndrome; a 36-year-old woman had acromegaly due to a pituitary adenoma, a toxic multinodular goiter that was associated with spontaneous normalization of thyroid function, and asymptomatic polyostotic fibrous dysplasia. There was no skin pigmentation and no sexual precocity. See 139320.0009 for discussion of the molecular basis of the association of pituitary tumor with McCune-Albright syndrome. Chanson et al. (1994) reported 5 patients with McCune-Albright syndrome and acromegaly. In all, acromegaly began before the age of 20 years and was recognized after the diagnosis of fibrous dysplasia, which was polyostotic in 3 and monostotic in 2. Bone fibrous dysplasia always involved the base of the skull and in 4 patients prevented surgical removal of the pituitary adenoma, which was visualized easily by MRI.
Yoshimoto et al. (1991) described the extraordinary case of a female infant who at birth had cutaneous pigmentation, hyperthyroidism, and Cushing syndrome.
Mastorakos et al. (1997) described a 6-year-old girl with MAS and hyperthyroidism and reviewed the previously reported 63 patients with MAS and thyroid disorders.
Kirk et al. (1999) presented 5 children (4 girls) with features of McCune-Albright syndrome who had Cushing syndrome in the infantile period (under 6 months of age). In 2 children, spontaneous resolution occurred, but the remaining 3 required bilateral adrenalectomy. In addition, all 4 girls experienced precocious puberty, and 3 children demonstrated radiologic evidence of nephrocalcinosis. In 1 patient, laparotomy, performed at 7 weeks of age because of vomiting and abdominal distention, revealed multiloculated ovarian cysts. Bilateral adrenalectomy was performed at 3 months for nodular hyperplasia. Irregular vaginal bleeding in association with breast development occurred by 11 months of age. Thyrotoxicosis subsequently developed, and the patient had a number of pathologic fractures of both femurs through polyostotic lesions and had marked spinal deformity. Kirk et al. (1999) postulated that the hypercalcemia and hypercalciuria leading to renal stones are secondary to the effects of cortisol on bone turnover.
Yang et al. (1999) reported a case of thyroid cancer in McCune-Albright syndrome. Collins et al. (2003) reported a second case and reviewed both cases, extending the phenotypic spectrum of the disorder.
Phenotypic Variation
Cole et al. (1983) reported the case of a French-Canadian boy, of nonconsanguineous parents, who had unusual facial appearance (depressed nasal bridge, synophrys, and forehead hirsutism), 'coast of Maine' pigmented patches, myelofibrosis, recurrent femoral fractures and widespread fibrous dysplasia of bone leading to the suggested designation 'panostotic fibrous dysplasia.' Biochemical findings included elevated serum alkaline phosphatase (bone isozyme) and 1,25-(OH)2 vitamin D and low serum phosphorus levels. Increased turnover of bone was indicated by urinary excretion rates of hydroxyproline, glycylproline, and gamma-carboxyglutamic acid. Progressive cortical thinning and loss of bony trabeculae were demonstrated by serial x-rays and supported by bone biopsy. No precisely similar case was known. Candeliere et al. (1995) demonstrated that this patient, then a 14-year-old boy, had an arg201-to-cys mutation in the GNAS1 gene (139320.0008). Thus, this was an unusually severe form of McCune-Albright syndrome not fundamentally different from that disorder or perhaps from monostotic fibrous dysplasia. Cole (1996) pointed out that the patient with 'idiopathic hyperphosphatasia with dermal pigmentation' reported by Dohler et al. (1986) appears to have had the same disorder as the patient reported by Cole et al. (1983).
De Sanctis et al. (1999) reported the diagnostic clinical features and their long-term evolution in 32 patients with McCune-Albright syndrome. Almost all patients had skin changes at birth. There was a 50% probability of bone dysplasia at 8 years of age and a 50% probability of precocious puberty in females at 4 years.
Coutant et al. (2001) reported a 3.8-year-old boy with McCune-Albright syndrome associated with abnormal prepubertal testis enlargement and no sexual precocity. Physical examination showed cafe-au-lait skin lesions, enlarged testes, prepubertal sized penis, and no pubic or axillary hair. Skeletal radiography disclosed fibrous dysplasia. The serum testosterone level was 0.58 nmol/L and remained below 1.4 nmol/L during the 4-year follow-up. By contrast, serum inhibin B (see 147290) and anti-mullerian hormone (600957) concentrations were abnormally increased up to 255 pg/mL (childhood range, 35-180) and 792 pmol/L (childhood range, 309-566), respectively. The luteinizing hormone (LH; 152780) response to a gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH; 152760) test was in the prepubertal range, whereas the follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH; 136530) response was blunted. This abnormal hormone concentration profile indicated autonomous hyperfunction of Sertoli cells, with no evidence of Leydig cell activation. Testicular histology showed tubules with marked Sertoli cell hyperplasia and very rare germinal cells, and interstitial tissue containing mesenchymal cells but no mature Leydig cells. DNA sequence analysis from bone and testis tissues detected the known activating mutation in MAS that results in the arg201-to-his mutation in the GNAS1 protein (139320.0009).
**Osseous heteroplasia, progressive, 166350 (3), AD**
Progressive osseous heteroplasia is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by dermal ossification beginning in infancy, followed by increasing and extensive bone formation in deep muscle and fascia (Kaplan et al., 1994).
The molecular defect causing POH is the same as that causing PPHP: an inactivating GNAS mutation caused only by paternal inheritance of the mutant allele. However, patients with PPHP have a constellation of physical findings referred to as Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO; see 103580) that is often not seen in patients with POH. Bastepe and Juppner (2005) suggested that POH may be an extreme end of the spectrum of the AHO features seen in PPHP.
Fawcett and Marsden (1983) reported osteoma cutis in 3 generations of a family. The 3-year-old proposita developed hard nodules in the skin at age 6 months. Skin biopsies showed multiple spicules of bone in the skin, which showed normal membranous bone structures. The surrounding dermis showed no scarring or inflammatory changes. She was diagnosed with celiac disease at age 3 years. Her 6-year-old sister had skin lesions of the legs and trunk starting about the same age but at age 2 years she had a painful, swollen right ankle. Soft tissue calcifications were visualized in both the hands and feet. The father of the girls had several cutaneous osteomas on the arms. His father, deceased, was known to have had similar lesions on his shoulders for many years. Fawcett and Marsden (1983) noted that Peterson and Mandel (1963) had described an affected mother and son. The mother also had multiple pigmented nevi; the son died at 15 months of alveolar sarcoma of the cerebellum. Although Brook and Valman (1971) noted that early cases may have represented AHO, Fawcett and Marsden (1983) thought that AHO was unlikely in their family.
Gardner et al. (1988) described a family in which members in 2 generations and 3 sibships had ectopic ossification. Inheritance was autosomal dominant. Most members had childhood onset of multifocal subcutaneous ossifications, or primary osteoma cutis, which were of trivial clinical significance. One family member had extensive ectopic ossification involving the right leg, first noted at the age of 3 weeks and severely interfering with growth of the limb by age 8 years.
McKusick (1989) observed osteoma cutis in a 38-year-old man who also had unerupted teeth, severe bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, and unusual changes in the bones of the forearms and legs that were quite different from those of pseudohypoparathyroidism.
Izraeli et al. (1992) described congenital osteoma cutis in members of 3 generations with convincing clinical and laboratory evidence of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy and with one instance of male-to-male transmission. In the propositus, small, flat, and hard subcutaneous plaques were noted on the back at birth, and biopsy at the age of 3 days confirmed the diagnosis of osteoma cutis. In a sister similar nodules were noted in the first month of life, and the mother had had a hard subcutaneous nodule on the hand from birth. No deficiency of Gs activity was detected by the assay used.
Kaplan et al. (1994) reported 2 new cases and follow-up on 3 previously reported cases, 1 of which was that reported by Gardner et al. (1988). At follow-up examination of this family, the proband was 31 years old, was married, and had a daughter who was clinically normal. This patient's family was the only one in which relatives were affected; individuals in 4 sibships in 2 generations showed minor cutaneous ossification only. A maculopapular eruption was observed in the early stages of the disorder and all of the children had ossification of the skin in infancy. None of the children developed preosseous tumor-like swellings, a nearly universal finding in fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP; 135100). All developed progression of heterotopic ossification into deep connective tissues, including fascia and skeletal muscle, in a process of ossification that was primarily intramembranous rather than endochondral. The radiologic pattern of heterotopic ossification in POH was a cocoon-like web of heterotopic bone entangling the soft connective tissues from the dermis down through skeletal muscle without regard to tissue planes.
Athanasou et al. (1994) reported a typical case in an 18-year-old girl.
Schmidt et al. (1994) reported a 9-year-old Hispanic girl who had progressive ossification of the soft tissues on the right side of the face and body. Histologic analysis of biopsy material showed intramembranous, subcutaneous ossification.
Rosenfeld and Kaplan (1995) found reports of 8 classic cases, all in female patients, and documented typical features of progressive osseous heteroplasia in 2 boys, 1 of whom showed left-sided hemimelic heterotopic ossification.
Urtizberea et al. (1998) described male patients.
Stoll et al. (2000) reported the clinical and radiologic features of a patient with POH who was 20 years old at presentation. In addition to abnormal ossifications, she had short metacarpals at the fourth and fifth rays and short metatarsals at the second rays. Her parents were unaffected. At the time of the patient's birth, her father and mother were 48 and 36 years old, respectively.
Kaplan (2000) noted that patients with POH do not have the characteristic malformation of the great toe seen in fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva and that patients with FOP do not have ossification of the skin in infancy. POH is also distinct from tumoral calcinosis (211900).
Eddy et al. (2000) reported 2 unrelated girls with typical clinical, radiographic, and histologic features of POH who also had findings of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. One child had mild brachydactyly but no endocrinopathy, whereas the other manifested brachydactyly, obesity, and target tissue resistance to thyrotropin and parathyroid hormone. Erythrocyte membranes from both girls showed decreased levels of the Gs-alpha, suggesting that the 2 conditions share a similar molecular basis and pathogenesis.
Faust et al. (2003) described an 8-year-old Albanian girl with POH of the face. Biopsy showed osteoma cutis superficially with ectopic bone formation in the deeper tissues, including skeletal muscle.
Adegbite et al. (2008) reviewed the charts of 111 individuals with cutaneous and subcutaneous ossification. All patients were assessed for 8 characteristics: age of onset of heterotopic ossification (HO), presence and location of HO, depth of HO, progression of HO, features of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, parathyroid hormone resistance, and GNAS mutation analysis. Based on clinical criteria, they concluded that POH and progressive HO syndromes are at the severe end of a phenotypic spectrum of GNAS-inactivating conditions associated with extraskeletal ossification and that they can be distinguished from other GNAS-based disorders by a single clinical parameter, i.e., the extension of HO from superficial to deep tissue.
**Pituitary adenoma 3, multiple types, somatic, 617686 (3)**
Somatic mutations in the GNAS gene have been found predominantly in GH-secreting pituitary adenomas but also in ACTH-secreting adenomas.
Mutations in the GNAS gene have been found in about 40% of sporadic somatotrophin adenomas (summary by Mete and Lopes, 2017).
For a general description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of pituitary adenomas, see PITA1 (102200).
**Pseudohypoparathyroidism Ia, 103580 (3), AD**
Pseudohypoparathyroidism is a term applied to a heterogeneous group of disorders whose common feature is end-organ resistance to parathyroid hormone (PTH; 168450). In addition to PTH resistance, PHP Ia is characterized by resistance to other hormones, including thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; see TSHB, 188540) and gonadotropins. PHP Ia is associated with a constellation of clinical features referred to as Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO), which includes short stature, obesity, round facies, subcutaneous ossifications, brachydactyly, and other skeletal anomalies. Some patients have mental retardation (Mantovani and Spada, 2006).
In contrast, pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP; 612463) is characterized by the physical findings of AHO but without hormone resistance (Kinard et al., 1979; Fitch, 1982; Mantovani and Spada, 2006).
PHP1A occurs only after maternal inheritance of the molecular defect, whereas PPHP occurs only after paternal inheritance of the molecular defect (Davies and Hughes, 1993; Wilson et al., 1994). This is an example of imprinting, with differential gene expression depending on the parent of origin of the allele. See INHERITANCE and PATHOGENESIS sections.
Albright et al. (1942) described 3 patients with short stature, round face, short neck, obesity, subcutaneous calcifications, and shortened metacarpals associated with hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. Although the phenotype resembled parathyroid hormone deficiency, renal function was normal and apparently unresponsive to administration of bovine parathyroid extract. The authors hypothesized that the clinical findings were due to resistance to PTH rather than to PTH deficiency, and termed the disorder 'pseudohypoparathyroidism' (PHP). The specific pattern of observable physical features described by Albright et al. (1942) constitutes 'Albright hereditary osteodystrophy.'
Mann et al. (1962) observed parathyroid hyperplasia in patients with PHP, suggesting increased serum PTH, not deficiency of PTH. Chase and Aurbach (1968) found that PTH circulated in abnormally high concentration in pseudohypoparathyroidism, and that secretion of the hormone responded normally to physiologic control by calcium.
In patients with PHP, Chase et al. (1969) found that urinary cAMP did not increase in response to PTH administration, a finding that was in contrast to controls. The authors suggested that the basic defect in PHP may be a deficient amount or function of PTH-sensitive adenyl cyclase in kidney and bone.
Farfel et al. (1980) found that 5 patients with PHP I and AHO had abnormally low urinary cAMP excretion in response to PTH infusion. There was also a 40 to 50% reduced activity of the G protein, which the authors termed 'N,' that couples the membrane hormone receptor to adenylate cyclase.
Farfel et al. (1981) reported 10 patients with PHP type Ia. Typical features included short stature, brachydactyly, hypocalcemia, elevated serum PTH, and decreased urinary excretion of cAMP following exogenous PTH infusion. Erythrocyte Gs activity was decreased by approximately 50% in 15 patients with PHP type I, but was normal in 19 of their clinically normal first-degree relatives. Inheritance patterns were not consistent with a single mode of transmission. Bourne et al. (1981) reported 5 patients with PHP type I patients who showed a 40% reduction in red cell N protein activity.
Downs et al. (1983) reported a 16-year-old girl with PHP Ia who had resistance to PTH, thyrotropin, and gonadotropins. She had multiple subcutaneous calcifications, uniformly short metacarpals, hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, elevated serum PTH, no response in urinary cAMP to PTH infusion, elevated plasma thyrotropin, low serum thyroxine, no thyroid enlargement, oligomenorrhea, low serum estrogen, high LH and FSH, and normal response to endogenous ACTH during a standard metyrapone test and after insulin-induced hypoglycemia. Red cell membrane Gs activity was 57% of control; renal membranes showed only 30% of control.
Weisman et al. (1985) observed congenital hypothyroidism as the presenting manifestation of PHP. Levine et al. (1985) reported a brother and sister with infantile hypothyroidism whose mother had PHP type Ia. Both children were normocalcemic. Resistance to thyroid-stimulating hormone was reflected in the reduced level of Gs in red cell membranes.
Hewitt and Chambers (1988) reported a patient with PHP type I in whom subcutaneous calcification developed at the age of 3 months. 'Hard lumps' were located on the chest wall and groin.
Izraeli et al. (1992) described a family in which 5 members of 3 successive generations had the clinical features of AHO associated with progressive osseus heteroplasia (POH; 166350), which is caused by activating mutations of GNAS1 inherited on the paternal allele.
Zung et al. (1996) pictured subcutaneous nodules of the left heel in a 7-year-old girl with AHO features. The mother, aged 38 years, had multiple subcutaneous masses of the limbs and bilateral shortening of the fourth metacarpals. A mammogram showed calcified breast nodules which were also palpable.
Aldred et al. (2000) reported a sister and brother with PHP Ia, including hypocalcemia, resistance to PTH, and elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone. Both sibs also had neonatal diarrhea and pancreatic insufficiency that corrected spontaneously after several months.
Mantovani et al. (2003) investigated the presence of pituitary resistance to hypothalamic hormones acting via G-coupled receptors in patients with PHP Ia. Six of 9 patients showed an impaired growth hormone (GH; 139250) responsiveness to GHRH (139190) plus arginine, consistent with a complete GH deficiency; partial and normal responses were found in 2 and 1 patient, respectively. Accordingly, IGF1 (147440) levels were below and in the low-normal range in 7 and 2 patients, respectively. The authors concluded that in addition to PTH and TSH resistance, patients with PHP Ia display variable degrees of GHRH resistance, consistent with Gs-alpha imprinting in the human pituitary. The findings were consistent with abnormalities of secretion of thyroid hormone (de Wijn and Steendijk, 1982) and gonadotropins (Shapiro et al., 1980) that had been described in patients with PHP.
Brachydactyly, classically described as shortening of III, IV, and V metacarpals and I distal phalanx, is the typical and most specific feature of AHO. This phenotype has been reported in 70% of PHP subjects from routine radiologic examinations. De Sanctis et al. (2004) evaluated the metacarpophalangeal pattern profile in 14 genetically characterized patients with PHP Ia and determined the prevalence and patterns of left hand bone shortening. Shortening below -2 SD score was present in at least 1 bone in each subject, with a prevalence of 100%; however, great variability existed between subjects and between hand bone segments. Brachymetacarpia and brachytelephalangy characterized the hands of the subjects.
Clinical Variability
De Nanclares et al. (2007) reported 4 unrelated patients who were thought to have PHP1A because of PTH and TSH resistance and mild features of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. Two patients showed decreased G-alpha activity in erythrocytes. However, genetic analysis did not reveal germline point mutations in the GNAS gene in any of the patients; instead, all were found to have GNAS methylation defects, which are usually associated with PHP1B. Furthermore, 1 of the patients with normal G-alpha activity was found to have a 3.0-kb STX16 deletion (603666.0001), which is usually associated with PHP1B. The findings suggested that there may be an overlap between the molecular and clinical features of PHP1A and PHP1B, and that methylation defects may manifest as mild PHP1A.
**Pseudohypoparathyroidism Ib, 603233 (3), AD**
Pseudohypoparathyroidism refers to a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by resistance to parathyroid hormone (PTH; 168450). Pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ib is characterized clinically by isolated renal PTH resistance manifest as hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and increased serum PTH. Biochemical studies show a decreased response of urinary cAMP to exogenous PTH, but normal Gs activity in erythrocytes because the defect is restricted to renal tubule cells. In contrast to the findings in PHP Ia, patients with PHP Ib usually lack the physical characteristics of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO) and typically show no other endocrine abnormalities, although resistance to thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; 188540) has been reported in PHP Ib (Levine et al., 1983, Heinsimer et al., 1984). However, patients with PHP Ib may rarely show some features of AHO (Mariot et al., 2008).
For a general phenotypic description, classification, and a discussion of molecular genetics of pseudohypoparathyroidism, see PHP1A (103580).
Frame et al. (1972) reported 2 patients with renal resistance to parathyroid hormone characterized by hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia and associated with osteitis fibrosa cystica. Frame et al. (1972) postulated that renal PTH resistance was the primary defect and that a secondary hyperparathyroid state occurred to cause the skeletal changes of osteitis fibrosa. The calcemic effect of both endogenous and exogenous PTH was blunted by the presence of hyperphosphatemia.
Farfel and Bourne (1980) reported a family in which 5 patients with PHP type I had no signs of AHO and showed normal erythrocyte Gs protein activity.
Kidd et al. (1980) described 3 patients with PHP and bone findings consistent with hyperparathyroidism, including elevated serum alkaline phosphatase and subperiosteal resorption on skeletal films. None of the patients had AHO features of short stature, brachydactyly, or mental deficiency. The authors commented on the paradoxic occurrence of hyperparathyroid bone disease in PHP, and suggested that this was an extreme of a clinical spectrum of skeletal responsiveness to excess PTH.
Heinsimer et al. (1984) found that beta-adrenergic agonist-specific binding properties of red cell membranes were 45% of controls in 5 patients with PHP Ia and 97% of controls in 5 patients with PHP Ib. Further studies were consistent with a single defect causing deficient hormone receptor-nucleotide complex formation and adenylate cyclase activity in PHP Ia, whereas the biochemical lesion(s) appeared not to affect the complex formation in PHP Ib.
Liu et al. (2000) studied 13 patients with PHP Ib, all of whom initially presented with hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and elevated serum PTH levels in the absence of renal insufficiency or any of the clinical or radiologic features of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. Serum thyrotropin (TSH), thyroxine (T4), free T4, triiodothyronine (T3), and 25-hydroxyvitamin D levels were normal in all patients. Two patients had overt osteitis fibrosa cystica at presentation that resolved with oral calcium and vitamin D therapy. Two other patients had at least 1 other affected family member.
Clinical Variability
De Nanclares et al. (2007) reported 4 unrelated patients who were thought to have PHP1A because of PTH and TSH resistance and mild features of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. Two patients showed decreased G-alpha activity in erythrocytes. However, genetic analysis did not reveal germline point mutations in the GNAS gene in any of the patients; instead, all were found to have GNAS methylation defects, which are usually associated with PHP1B. Furthermore, 1 of the patients with normal G-alpha activity was found to have a 3.0-kb STX16 deletion (603666.0001), which is usually associated with PHP1B. The findings suggested that there may be an overlap between the molecular and clinical features of PHP1A and PHP1B, and that methylation defects may manifest as mild PHP1A.
Mariot et al. (2008) reported a girl with obvious Albright osteodystrophy features, PTH resistance, and normal G-alpha-s bioactivity in red blood cells (PHP Ib), yet no loss-of-function mutation in the GNAS coding sequence. The patient had broad methylation changes at all differentially methylated regions of the GNAS gene leading to a paternal epigenotype on both alleles. Mariot et al. (2008) suggested that Albright osteodystrophy features are not specific to PHP Ia, and concluded that the decreased expression of G-alpha-s due to GNAS epimutations is not restricted to the renal tubule but may affect nonimprinted tissues like bone. PHP1B should be considered a heterogeneous disorder that should lead to the study of GNAS epigenotype in patients with PHP and no mutation in GNAS exons 1 through 13, regardless of their physical features.
Lecumberri et al. (2010) reported a patient with PHP1B who had paternal uniparental isodisomy of chromosome 20q. However, he also had mild features of AHO and cognitive impairment, suggestive of PHP1A. Erythrocyte Gs-alpha activity was slightly decreased at 81% of control values.
**Pseudohypoparathyroidism Ic, 612462 (3), AD**
Pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ic (PHP1C) is characterized by resistance to parathyroid hormone (PTH; 168450) as well as to other hormones. It is associated with a constellation of physical features referred to as Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO), which includes short stature, obesity, round facies, subcutaneous ossifications, brachydactyly, and other skeletal anomalies. Some patients have mental retardation. Laboratory studies in patients with PHP Ic show a decreased cellular cyclic AMP (cAMP) response to infused PTH, but no defect in activity of the erythrocyte Gs protein (Mantovani and Spada, 2006).
Farfel et al. (1981) reported a family in which several affected individuals had classic PHP type I, including PTH-resistance, hypothyroidism, and skeletal abnormalities such as short stature and brachydactyly. There was a decreased urinary cAMP response to PTH, but normal erythrocyte activity of N-protein, a receptor-cyclase coupling component. Farfel et al. (1981) postulated a defect distal to the PTH receptor in these families.
Linglart et al. (2002) reported a girl with pseudohypoparathyroidism, multiple hormonal resistance, and AHO, but normal erythrocyte Gs activity. The phenotype was referred to as PHP type Ic.
Thiele et al. (2011) reported 5 patients from 4 unrelated families with a diagnosis of PHP Ic. Two patients were dizygotic twins. All had round face and brachymetacarpia, 3 were obese, and 2 had short stature. One had mental retardation. All had significantly increased serum PTH, all but 1 had decreased serum calcium, and all had increased TSH, suggesting end-organ hormone resistance. Erythrocyte Gs-alpha activity was normal in cellular studies. All mothers of the patients had milder features, including short stature, round face, or brachymetacarpia, but none had evidence of hormonal resistance; 2 were given a diagnosis of pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP; 612463).
**Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism, 612463 (3), AD**
Patients with pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism do not show resistance to parathyroid hormone (PTH; 168450) or other hormones, as is the case with PHP1A (103580), but do manifest the constellation of clinical features referred to as Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO), which includes short stature, obesity, round facies, subcutaneous ossifications, brachydactyly, and other skeletal anomalies. Some patients have mental retardation (Kinard et al., 1979; Fitch, 1982; Mantovani and Spada, 2006).
PPHP occurs only after paternal inheritance of the molecular defect, whereas PHP1A occurs only after maternal inheritance of the molecular defect (see Inheritance and Pathogenesis below). This is an example of imprinting, with differential gene expression depending on the parent of origin of the allele (Davies and Hughes, 1993; Wilson et al., 1994).
For a general phenotypic description, classification, and a discussion of molecular genetics of pseudohypoparathyroidism, see PHP1A (103580).
Albright et al. (1952) described a 29-year-old woman with physical features similar to those reported by Albright et al. (1942) as Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, but there were no serum calcium abnormalities suggestive of PTH resistance. Albright et al. (1952) termed this disorder 'pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism' (PPHP) to distinguish it from the disorder reported by Albright et al. (1942) as 'pseudohypoparathyroidism.'
Weinberg and Stone (1971) described a family in which a brother and sister had PHP1A (103580) and the son and daughter of the brother had PPHP. All had clinical features of AHO, which were more prominent in the patients with PHP1A. The patients were of normal intelligence but showed ectopic calcification and ossification, rounded facies, 'absent 4th knuckles,' and short feet and hands with particularly short fourth metacarpals.
Warner et al. (1998) reported a 24-year-old man with PPHP. Developmental delay, brachycephaly, and decreased muscle tone were noted by age 10 months. Throughout childhood he was small for his age and stocky in appearance. By 6 years, he developed learning disabilities as well as impulsive and aggressive behavior. Brachydactyly involved the distal phalanx of the thumb and the fourth metacarpals bilaterally. He also had intracranial calcifications in the globus pallidus. There was no evidence of resistance to parathyroid hormone or thyrotropin. Genetic analysis identified a de novo heterozygous mutation in the GNAS gene (139320.0016).
Fischer et al. (1998) reported a large kindred in which 2 mothers with PPHP had 6 offspring with PHP Ia. The PPHP patients had decreased erythrocyte Gs activity, but normal urinary cAMP responses to PTH, normal TSH levels and responses to TRH, and normal serum levels of calcium and PTH.



SCN9A
**{Dravet syndrome, modifier of}, 607208 (3), AD**
Dravet syndrome, first described by Dravet (1978), is a clinical term for a severe neurologic disorder characterized by the onset of seizures in the first year of life after normal early development. Affected individuals usually present with generalized tonic, clonic, and tonic-clonic seizures that may initially be induced by fever and are usually refractory to treatment. Later, patients tend to manifest other seizure types, including absence, myoclonic, and partial seizures. The EEG is often normal at first, but later characteristically shows generalized spike-wave activity and other abnormalities. Psychomotor development stagnates around the second year of life, and affected individuals show subsequent mental decline, behavioral problems, and learning disabilities (summary by Dravet et al., 1992; Sugawara et al., 2002; Harkin et al., 2007; Shbarou and Mikati, 2016). 'Severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy' (SMEI) and 'migrating partial seizures of infancy' (MPSI) are other clinical manifestations of Dravet syndrome (summary by Ohmori et al., 2002; Carranza Rojo et al., 2011; Dravet et al., 2011).
Although most cases of Dravet syndrome are caused by mutation in the SCN1A gene, there are other developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) with clinical features similar to Dravet syndrome that are caused by mutations in other genes (summary by Steel et al., 2017).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of DEE, see 308350.
Claes et al. (2001) reported 7 unrelated Belgian patients, who ranged in age from 2 to 10 years, with a clinical diagnosis of severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI). The patients developed seizures between 2 and 6 months of age after normal early development. Initial seizures were generalized, and 4 of 7 patients had seizures associated with fever. Subsequent seizures included secondary generalized tonic-clonic, myoclonic, absence, and simple and complex partial seizures. The seizures were resistant to therapy in all patients, and all subsequently showed developmental delay with impaired intellectual development. Five patients had ataxia; 1 died at 4 years of age.
Fujiwara et al. (2003) reported 25 Japanese patients with SMEI and 10 Japanese patients with what they termed 'intractable childhood epilepsy with generalized tonic-clonic seizures (ICEGTC),' which was only distinguished from SMEI by the absence of myoclonus. Twenty-two (62.8%) patients had a family history of seizures, including febrile convulsions and epilepsy consistent with GEFS+. The majority of patients had high voltage 4- to 7-Hz diffuse slow background activity on EEG. A total of 30 heterozygous mutations were identified in the SCN1A gene in this group of patients.
Jansen et al. (2006) reported 14 adults with Dravet syndrome who ranged in age from 18 to 47 years. All had been referred for refractory epilepsy and intellectual disability without an etiologic diagnosis. Medical history revealed seizure onset between 3 to 11 months (mean 6 months), which was associated with fever in 9 patients. During childhood, all had generalized or unilateral tonic-clonic seizures, 12 had myoclonic seizures, 11 had absence seizures, 8 had complex partial seizures, and 6 had atonic seizures. Psychomotor development slowed in all after initial normal development. Eight patients had a family history of seizures. As adults, generalized tonic-clonic seizures were the dominant type, but all other types of seizures still occurred. Ten patients had motor abnormalities, including cerebellar signs in 4, pyramidal signs in 6, and extrapyramidal signs in 4. One patient had low-average intellect, 2 had mild intellectual disability, 5 were moderately retarded, and 6 had severe impairment. Two patients lived independently but were unemployed. Genetic analysis showed that 10 patients had mutations in the SCN1A gene and 1 had a mutation in the GABRG2 gene. Jansen et al. (2006) noted that the findings indicated a poor outcome for affected individuals and emphasized that correct diagnosis in adult patients requires a knowledge of early medical history.
Riva et al. (2009) found that 2 unrelated children with genetically confirmed Dravet syndrome had progressive neurocognitive decline when longitudinally assessed from ages 11 and 23 months to 7 and 8 years, respectively. Importantly, delayed motor, intellectual, and rational development was already apparent at the time of seizure onset in both patients. One patient had a more severe seizure phenotype consistent with an epileptic encephalopathy, with numerous myoclonic seizures occurring almost daily and more frequent occurrence of tonic-clonic seizures compared to the second patient. However, both patients showed progressive deterioration in cognitive function over time, although there were differences in specific neuropsychologic functions affected. Riva et al. (2009) concluded that SCN1A mutations may play a role in early and progressive mental impairment in addition to their role in epilepsy.
Clinical Variability
Harkin et al. (2007) identified SCN1A mutations in a cohort of patients with a wide spectrum of infantile epileptic encephalopathies. Among a total of 188 patients, SCN1A mutations were found in 52 (79%) of 66 with SMEI (Dravet syndrome) and in 25 (69%) of 36 with 'severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy-borderline (SMEB),' a phenotype lacking one or more features of SMEI, such as myoclonus or generalized spike-wave discharges on EEG. In addition, SCN1A mutations were less commonly found in patients with other forms of early-onset epilepsy, characterized as cryptogenic generalized or focal epilepsy, myoclonic-astatic epilepsy, and severe infantile multifocal epilepsy (SIMFE). Although the study indicated that a broader range of seizure phenotypes is associated with SCN1A mutations, Harkin et al. (2007) noted that the nosologic boundaries between these phenotypes is blurred. There were no apparent genotype/phenotype correlations.
'Malignant migrating partial seizures of infancy' (MPSI, MMPSI) is a clinical term for a severe form of infantile epileptic encephalopathy with seizure onset between 1 day and 6 months of age. EEG studies typically show migrating focal onset progressing to multifocal onset, and seizures are refractory to therapeutic intervention. Affected individuals have developmental regression after seizure onset, severe global developmental delay, and progressive microcephaly. Early death often occurs. The phenotype is considered to be more severe than that of typical Dravet syndrome (summary by Freilich et al., 2011 and Carranza Rojo et al., 2011). Freilich et al. (2011) reported a female infant who presented clinically with MPSI associated with a heterozygous mutation in the SCN1A gene (A1669E; 182389.0023). She had a severe phenotype, with onset of seizures at age 10 weeks, progression to refractory recurrent seizures by age 5 months, status epilepticus, EEG evidence of migrating focal onset progressing to multifocal seizures, progressive microcephaly, and profound psychomotor delay. She died at age 9 months.
Carranza Rojo et al. (2011) found that 2 of 15 unrelated infants with a clinical diagnosis of MPSI had defects in the SCN1A gene. One had a de novo missense mutation (R862G; 182389.0024) and the other had a de novo 11.06-Mb deletion of chromosome 2q24.2-q31.1 encompassing more than 40 genes that included SCN1A. The patient with the R862G mutation had onset of multifocal hemiclonic seizures at age 2 weeks with status epilepticus. She had acquired microcephaly, developmental regression, and severe intellectual disability. These reports expanded the severity of the epileptic phenotype associated with SCN1A mutations to include MPSI. Moreover, the lack of SCN1A mutations in 13 patients with a similar diagnosis by Carranza Rojo et al. (2011) indicated genetic heterogeneity for the MPSI entity.
**Febrile seizures, familial, 3B, 613863 (3), AD**
Mutations in the SCN9A gene cause a spectrum of seizure disorders, ranging from early-onset isolated febrile seizures to generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus, type 7, which represents a more severe phenotype. Patients with isolated febrile seizures usually have onset between ages 5 months to 4 years and show spontaneous remission by age 6 years (summary by Singh et al., 2009), whereas patients with GEFS+ continue to have various types of febrile and afebrile seizures later in life (summary by Singh et al., 1999).
Mutations in certain genes can cause a phenotypic spectrum of overlap between the isolated febrile phenotype and the GEFS+ phenotype. For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of GEFS+, see 604233.
For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of familial febrile seizures, see 121210.
Singh et al. (2009) studied a large Utah family with autosomal dominant GEFS+. The family was originally reported by Peiffer et al. (1999) as having predominantly febrile seizures, which was mapped to a locus on chromosome 2q24 designated 'FEB3.' However, Moulard et al. (2000) and Scheffer et al. (2000) both concluded that the phenotype reported in the family by Peiffer et al. (1999) was most consistent with GEFS+, since afebrile seizures continued beyond childhood in several affected individuals. The follow-up report by Singh et al. (2009) stated that this family showed a broad spectrum of seizure manifestations. Eleven individuals experienced only febrile seizures before age 6 years, whereas 10 additional individuals developed later afebrile seizures. In 8 of the 10, seizures remitted by age 16 years. The remaining 2 affected individuals developed intractable epilepsy: 1 had complex-partial seizures associated with left mesial temporal sclerosis, and the other had afebrile generalized convulsive seizures requiring the placement of a vagal nerve stimulator. This phenotype is designated GEFS+, type 7.
Singh et al. (2009) also reported 2 unrelated patients with simple febrile seizures and 2 different heterozygous mutations in the SCN9A gene (I62V; 603415.0020 and P149Q; 603415.0021, respectively). This phenotype is designated FEB3B.
**Small fiber neuropathy, 133020 (3), AD**
'Primary erythermalgia' is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by childhood or adolescent onset of episodic symmetrical red congestion, vasodilatation, and burning pain of the feet and lower legs provoked by exercise, long standing, and exposure to warmth. Relief is obtained with cold (Michiels et al., 2005). The severity of the disorder may progress with age, and symptoms may extend over a larger body area, such as over the ankles and lower legs, and become constant (Mandell et al., 1977).
Waxman and Dib-Hajj (2005) provided a review of primary erythermalgia.
Although 'primary' or 'familial erythromelalgia' are sometimes used as alternative terms for primary erythermalgia (Waxman and Dib-Hajj, 2005), secondary erythromelalgia is a distinct acquired disorder associated with thrombocythemia or myeloproliferative disorders. It has relatively late onset and symptoms are caused by platelet aggregation in end-arteriolar circulation, leading to ischemia and symptoms (Michiels and van Joost, 1990). Treatment with aspirin, which irreversibly inhibits platelet cyclooxygenase activity, affords relief from acquired erythromelalgia (Michiels et al., 1984; Drenth et al., 1996). Similarly, acquired erythromelalgia vanishes with lowering the platelet count to normal with chemotherapy (Michiels et al., 1985).
Van Genderen et al. (1993) emphasized the distinction between hereditary erythermalgia and acquired erythromelalgia. In primary erythermalgia, the burning pain, redness, and warmth of feet and lower legs, with relative sparing of the toes, are easily provoked by warmth and exercise. In contrast, in acquired erythromelalgia the burning pain and red congestion preferentially involves one or more toes or fingers or sole of the forefoot (Michiels and van Joost, 1990). Van Genderen et al. (1993) noted that 3 of the 5 patients reported by Smith and Allen (1938) were not consistent with the diagnosis of primary erythromelalgia because the symptoms were relieved promptly by aspirin, consistent with acquired erythromelalgia.
Small Fiber Neuropathy
Small nerve fiber neuropathy (SFNP) is a relatively common disorder of thinly myelinated and unmyelinated nerve fibers characterized clinically by adult onset of neuropathic pain, often of a burning quality, and autonomic symptoms. Affected individuals have reduced intraepidermal nerve fiber density affecting the small diameter nerve fibers; large diameter fibers are spared (summary by Faber et al., 2012).
Mandell et al. (1977) reported a child with primary erythermalgia with onset at age 3 years.
Finley et al. (1988) described a family in which autosomal dominant inheritance of primary erythermalgia was supported by the fact that some males had unaffected daughters and an affected man had an affected son. The proband, a 26-year-old white female, had onset of burning feet while walking at age 9 years. Gradually the frequency of episodes, correlated with heat, increased. Humidity seemed to aggravate the symptoms. Relief of pain was achieved by an electric fan blowing on the feet, by putting the feet into a bucket of ice, or by taking large doses of aspirin. The same family had been reported by Burbank et al. (1966). Finley et al. (1992) provided follow-up of the family reported by Finley et al. (1988). There were 29 affected individuals spanning 5 generations. Onset was in early childhood, as early as the first year of life. Affected individuals reported intermittent pain, redness, and burning sensation of the hands and feet that was triggered by exercise, warm weather, and humidity. The episodes seemed to increase in frequency and severity with age. Medical treatment was unsatisfactory.
Herskovitz et al. (1993) described a 31-year-old man with hereditary sensory neuropathy first manifesting at the age of 18 years and with erythermalgia beginning at the age of 21. The burning pain in the feet occurred episodically especially during the spring and summer months, was precipitated by heat, and was associated with redness or purplish discoloration, warmth, and slight swelling of the feet. It was found that amitriptyline, 75 mg daily, provided marked relief of symptoms. The father was thought to be mildly affected on the basis of pes planus and clinical and nerve conduction studies. Although not described as erythromelalgia, the same situation was described by Dyck et al. (1983) in a family with 'burning feet' as the only manifestation of dominantly inherited sensory neuropathy. Their patient required sural nerve biopsy to demonstrate objective neuropathic abnormalities.
Michiels et al. (2005) reported a Flemish family in which 10 members spanning 4 generations had autosomal dominant primary erythermalgia. Five patients were available for study. Age at onset ranged from 2.5 to 10 years. Episodes were typically elicited by warmth, exercise, or standing, and relief was provided by cold. Attacks were characterized by moderate to severe painful, red, swollen feet; some patients developed skin lesions resulting from repeated exposure to cold water.
Small Fiber Neuropathy
Faber et al. (2012) reported 8 unrelated Dutch Caucasian patients with SFNP, 3 of whom reported similar complaints in family members. All 8 patients complained of pain, with onset ranging from 16 to 68 years of age. Most had onset of pain in the distal extremities, usually the feet, but 2 presented with pain throughout the body before affecting distal limbs. Pain was aggravated by warmth in 3, and relieved by cooling only in 1. One patient initially experienced excruciating pain in the teeth/jaw triggered by cold and heat, and pain behind the eyes, which was not relieved by multiple tooth extractions. Most patients reported persistence of the pain or burning over several years to involve the hands, mouth, or body. Seven of 8 patients had autonomic symptoms, including orthostatic dizziness, palpitations, dry eyes, and dry mouth. Two patients had significant gastrointestinal complaints. All had a decrease in skin small diameter nerve fibers below the fifth percentile for controls. All patients had some sort of distally altered temperature sensation.
Devigili et al. (2014) reported a woman, her sister, and their mother with small fiber neuropathy manifest as paroxysmal intense neuropathic itching and flushing, mainly triggered by warmth and spicy food. The proband developed itching symptoms at age 15 years, and the itch episodes were followed by prolonged burning pain in her thirties. There were no cardiovascular autonomic symptoms. The mother and sister had onset of itching as adults; they too described burning pain and flushing after the itch attacks. All 3 patients showed preferential involvement of the proximal arms, trunk, and neck, and all had impaired superficial sensation in the affected body areas. Skin biopsy in 2 patients showed reduced intraepithelial nerve fiber density. Treatment with pregabalin resulted in excellent relief.
**Insensitivity to pain, congenital, 243000 (3), AR**
Congenital indifference to pain is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by the complete absence of pain perception typically associated with noxious stimuli. Affected individuals are aware of a stimulus, but have lost the ability to perceive pain. Most patients are hyposmic or anosmic. Other sensory modalities are unaffected, and there is an absence of overt autonomic symptoms. Sural nerve biopsy and nerve conduction velocity studies are normal (summary by Cox et al., 2006; and Goldberg et al., 2012).
Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IID (HSAN2D) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by congenital or childhood-onset distal loss of pain and temperature sensation as well as autonomic dysfunction accompanied by hyposmia, hearing loss, hypogeusia, and sometimes bone dysplasia. The phenotype is highly variable, even within families. Two Japanese families have been reported (summary by Yuan et al., 2013).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of HSAN, see HSAN1 (162400).
Individuals with congenital indifference to pain have painless injuries beginning in infancy but otherwise normal sensory modalities. Perception of passive movement, joint position, and vibration are normal, as are tactile thresholds and light touch perception. Reflexes and autonomic responses are also normal. The axonal flare response after intradermal injection of histamine is normal, a finding that is in contrast to HSAN (Nagasako et al., 2003).
The first case of congenital analgesia is said to have been reported by Dearborn (1932). The patient made a living as a human pincushion act. A crucifixion had to be called off when a woman in the audience fainted after a spike was driven through one hand.
Fanconi and Ferrazzini (1957) described an affected brother and sister from consanguineous parents, and parental consanguinity has been noted in other cases (Ogden et al., 1959; Bertoye et al., 1964; Thiemann, 1961), suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance. Silverman and Gilden (1959) described a family in which 2 of 8 children of consanguineous parents were affected. Winkelmann et al. (1962) reviewed the subject of absence of pain, with a useful discussion of differential diagnosis.
Saldanha et al. (1964) described one family in which 3 brothers out of 10 sibs were affected and another family in which 2 sibs out of 11 were affected. The parents of the probands were normal and in 1 case were consanguineous. Gilly et al. (1964) described 2 affected sibs who were born of normal parents and were of normal intelligence. Osuntokun et al. (1968) described brother and half sister with congenital indifference to pain, who presumably had different fathers, both normal. They referred to the condition as 'pain asymbolia' and noted the association of auditory imperception. Gaudier et al. (1969) described affected brothers.
Baxter and Okzewski (1960) reported no anatomic abnormalities at autopsy. In several patients with congenital indifference to pain, Becak et al. (1964) found mosaicism of cells with normal karyotype and cells trisomic for a chromosome in the 13-15 group; Blau and Mutton (1967) could demonstrate no chromosomal abnormality.
Cox et al. (2006) described individuals from 3 Pakistani families with congenital inability to perceive any form of pain, in whom all other sensory modalities were preserved and the peripheral and central nervous systems were apparently otherwise intact. The trait was segregating as an autosomal recessive in the family. The index case was a 10-year-old child well known to the medical service after regularly performing 'street theater.' He placed knives through his arms and walked on burning coals, but experienced no pain. He died on his 14th birthday after jumping off a house roof. All affected individuals had injuries to their lips (some requiring plastic surgery) and/or tongue (with loss the distal third in 2 cases), caused by biting themselves in the first 4 years of life. The children were considered of normal intelligence by their parents and teachers. All could correctly perceive sensations of touch, warm and cold temperature, proprioception, tickle, and pressure, but not painful stimuli. Cox et al. (2006) referred to the disorder as 'channelopathy-associated insensitivity to pain.'
Weiss et al. (2011) found that individuals with channelopathy-associated insensitivity to pain caused by mutations in SCN9A were completely anosmic.
Clinical Variability
Ebermann et al. (2008) reported an 11-year-old boy, born of Egyptian consanguineous parents, with a phenotype suggestive of Navajo neurohepatopathy (MTDPS6; 256810), including short stature, frequent painless fractures, bruises, and cuts, hepatomegaly with elevated liver enzymes, corneal ulcerations, and mild hypotonia. His 22-month-old sister had short stature, hepatomegaly, increased liver enzymes, and hypotonia. A cousin had died at age 8 years from liver failure. After genetic analysis excluded a mutation in the MPV17 gene (137960), Ebermann et al. (2008) postulated 2 recessive diseases. Genomewide linkage analysis and gene sequencing of the proband identified a homozygous mutation in the AGL gene (610860), consistent with glycogen storage disease III (GSD3; 232400), and a homozygous mutation in the SCN9A gene, consistent with congenital insensitivity to pain. His sister had the AGL mutation and GSD3 only. Ebermann et al. (2008) emphasized that consanguineous matings increase the risk of homozygous genotypes and recessive diseases, which may complicate genetic counseling.
Hereditary Sensory and Autonomic Neuropathy, Type IID
Yuan et al. (2013) reported 2 Japanese sibs, born of consanguineous parents, and 1 unrelated Japanese patient with hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy. The phenotype was somewhat variable, even between the 2 sibs. A 50-year-old man developed decreased pain and temperature perception in the hands and feet in childhood, which progressed to the proximal limbs after age 40. He also had hyposmia, lack of sweating, skin lesions, including burn marks, and unilateral asymptomatic sensorineural hearing loss. There was mild weakness in the right lower limb, resulting in a steppage gait, and areflexia. His 55-year-old older sister had a history of recurrent fractures in childhood and had bone dysplasia with deformities of the elbow, foot, and lower limbs. She had no pain or temperature sensation in her feet as an adult. Other features included mild muscle weakness in the lower limbs and anhidrosis but not hyposmia or hearing loss. An unrelated 33-year-old man had decreased pain and temperature perception since birth, resulting in digital ulceration and deformities. Hyposmia and unilateral hearing loss were noted in early childhood. Other features included occasional urinary and fecal incontinence, reduced sweating, and reduced number of fungiform papillae on the tongue, consistent with autonomic dysfunction. He also had pigmentary skin lesions and left acetabular dysplasia resulting in asymmetric leg length. Vibration and joint position remained intact in all patients. Nerve conduction studies of the 2 unrelated men showed variably slowed sensory nerve conduction velocities (NCVs) and decreased sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) amplitudes in the median nerves. However, 1 patient had normal sural NCV and SNAP values. Sural nerve biopsy showed variable loss of myelinated fibers, which did not appear to correlate with symptoms in 1 patient. Both families were from the Kagoshima prefecture, but were unrelated.
**Paroxysmal extreme pain disorder, 167400 (3), AD**
Paroxysmal extreme pain disorder, formerly known as familial rectal pain, is characterized by paroxysms of rectal, ocular, or submandibular pain with flushing. Onset is usually in the neonatal period or infancy (Fertleman et al., 2006).
Hayden and Grossman (1959) described a syndrome consisting of very brief, excruciating pain of the submandibular, ocular and rectal areas with flushing of the surrounding skin. Autosomal dominant inheritance with incomplete penetrance of the components was suggested. Submandibular and ocular pain is a more consistent feature than rectal pain. They considered the condition to be a 'dysautonomia.'
Dugan (1972) described affected individuals in 5 generations with male-to-male transmission. 'Intense searing pain' accompanied bowel movements. 'Jaw aches' also were frequent.
Mann and Cree (1972) recorded some observations on another extensively affected family and gave graphic descriptions of the severe rectal pain. They concluded that the disorder is distinct from proctalgia fugax, first described by Thaysen (1935).
Fertleman et al. (2006) noted that PEXPD is a rare autosomal dominant disorder of pain and autonomic dysfunction that presents with 4 types of painful episode: birth crisis, in which babies are born red and stiff; rectal crisis, which is triggered by defecation in infants and young children and by a variety of emotional factors in older children and adults; ocular crisis, which may be provoked but is more usually spontaneous; and mandibular crisis, which is often triggered by eating and yawning. The distinctive features of this condition are paroxysmal episodes of burning pain in the rectal, ocular, and mandibular areas, accompanied by the autonomic manifestations such as skin flushing, reflex asystolic syncopal events, lacrimation, and rhinorrhea. In between episodes, physical examination is normal, and investigations such as imaging or tissue biopsy are normal. Diagnosis therefore relies on the history and either direct observation or video of the episodes.
Fertleman et al. (2007) reported the results of an international consortium that identified a total of 77 patients with PEXPD from 15 families. The earliest age at onset in the series was probably in utero, in which the fetal heart could not be picked up by cardiotocography. The infant was delivered by cesarean section and exhibited painful attacks on the first day of life. Most of the 77 patients presented at birth, likely induced by the pain of delivery. Although most patients reported localization of painful attacks to the rectal, ocular, or jaw area, consistent with previous reports, patients stressed that pain was not confined to these regions and could even involve the entire body. The pain was described as excruciating and the 'worst pain imaginable,' even worse than labor pain. Other phenotypic features of the attacks included skin flushing, harlequin color changes, and nonepileptic tonic seizures, which were more common in infants and young children. These seizures usually included posturing, apnea, bradycardia, and even asystole. Attacks were virtually always provoked by a physical trigger, such as defecation, eating, or crying. The only consistent problem between attacks was constipation, most likely because patients were reluctant to induce a painful attack. There appeared to be a decrease in attacks with age in general, although PEXPD is a lifelong disorder. Carbamazepine was effective in most who tried it, but the response was often incomplete.
Meglic et al. (2014) reported a 3-year-old girl with PEPD confirmed by genetic analysis (R185H; 603415.0026). From birth, she had painful urinary voiding manifest as crying, sweating, and writhing. Similar symptoms occasionally occurred when passing stool. She had no other autonomic manifestations, but had mildly delayed motor development. Treatment with carbamazepine resulted in significant clinical improvement and normal psychomotor development. Family history revealed that her father occasionally had pain in the jaw while yawning, but did not remember pain attacks in his early childhood; the father was found to carry the same heterozygous SCN9A mutation.



SPATA5
**Epilepsy, hearing loss, and mental retardation syndrome, 616577 (3), AR**
Epilepsy, hearing loss, and mental retardation syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by severe neurologic impairment including intellectual disability, intractable epilepsy, microcephaly, abnormal muscle tone, and sensorineural hearing loss. Most affected individuals are nonambulatory, cannot sit unassisted, and have no speech development. More variable features include feeding difficulties, poor growth, cortical visual impairment, spasticity, scoliosis, immunodeficiency, and thrombocytopenia (summary by Tanaka et al., 2015).
Tanaka et al. (2015) reported 14 children from 10 families with a severe neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by delayed psychomotor development, intellectual disability, microcephaly, and seizures. The patients ranged in age from 2 to 19 years. All patients had abnormal electroencephalograms (EEGs), and all but 1 had tonic-clonic, myoclonic, and/or absence seizures. Twelve patients had hypotonia, 3 had hypertonia, and 7 had spasticity. Most were nonambulatory, could not sit unsupported, and were nonverbal. Vision was variably impaired in all patients; 7 had cortical visual impairment. All patients also had sensorineural hearing impairment. Microcephaly was observed in at least 12 individuals, including 4 with congenital microcephaly and 4 with acquired microcephaly. Brain MRI was abnormal in 7 patients, showing variable diffuse atrophy, cortical atrophy, thin corpus callosum, and hypomyelination. Three patients had thrombocytopenia and 4 had immunodeficiency. Muscle biopsy of 2 patients was suggestive of a possible mitochondrial disorder.



NEK1
**{Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, susceptibility to, 24}, 617892 (3), AD**
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-24 (ALS24) is a fatal neurodegenerative disease characterized by adult-onset loss of motor neurons (Brenner et al., 2016).
Brenner et al. (2016) reported 3 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with truncating mutations in the NEK1 gene. The first patient presented at age 54 with upper and lower motor neuron signs in the left arm. Symptoms spread to the leg and right side, and within 2 years bulbar signs had developed. The patient was alive at the time of the report. The second patient presented at age 59 with dysphagia, and within 2 years had developed dysarthria, 'myatrophic paresis' of the left arm, and respiratory insufficiency, while the lower extremities were not affected. Hyperreflexia was present in the atrophic limb. The patient died at the age of 63. The patient's mother had died of ALS at the age of 62 after a 5-year disease progression with onset in the hands and progression to tetraparesis. Late in the disease she developed bulbar symptoms and had a gastrostoma. The third patient presented at the age of 75 years with asymmetric amyotrophic paresis of the first dorsal interosseous muscle of the left hand. Within 18 months the disease had progressed to an asymmetric amyotrophic tetraparesis with asymmetric hyperreflexia without spasticity in all limbs, early pseudobulbar dysarthria, dysphagia, and mild respiratory insufficiency. She was still alive 18 months after disease onset. This patient had an affected uncle who died of ALS at the age of 70; detailed medical history was not available. Cognitive impairment was either not clinically evident or absent upon testing in all patients, but the third patient showed atypical hippocampal/temporal frontal lobe functions, such as nonverbal memory, as well as severe hippocampal atrophy and atrophy of caudate and thalamus seen on MRI.
**Short-rib thoracic dysplasia 6 with or without polydactyly, 263520 (3), AR, Digenic recessive**
Short-rib thoracic dysplasia (SRTD) with or without polydactyly refers to a group of autosomal recessive skeletal ciliopathies that are characterized by a constricted thoracic cage, short ribs, shortened tubular bones, and a 'trident' appearance of the acetabular roof. SRTD encompasses Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (EVC) and the disorders previously designated as Jeune syndrome or asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (ATD), short rib-polydactyly syndrome (SRPS), and Mainzer-Saldino syndrome (MZSDS). Polydactyly is variably present, and there is phenotypic overlap in the various forms of SRTDs, which differ by visceral malformation and metaphyseal appearance. Nonskeletal involvement can include cleft lip/palate as well as anomalies of major organs such as the brain, eye, heart, kidneys, liver, pancreas, intestines, and genitalia. Some forms of SRTD are lethal in the neonatal period due to respiratory insufficiency secondary to a severely restricted thoracic cage, whereas others are compatible with life (summary by Huber and Cormier-Daire, 2012 and Schmidts et al., 2013).
There is phenotypic overlap with the cranioectodermal dysplasias (Sensenbrenner syndrome; see CED1, 218330).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of short-rib thoracic dysplasia, see SRTD1 (208500).
Majewski et al. (1971) reported 4 cases with a syndrome characterized by short ribs and limbs, median cleft lip, pre- and postaxial polysyndactyly, genital abnormalities, and anomalies of epiglottis and viscera. Death occurred perinatally in all. Majewski et al. (1971) identified 32 nearly identical or similar cases from the literature.
Spranger et al. (1974) reported a similar patient (case 1) whose sib may have died of the same condition, which they referred to as Majewski type short rib-polydactyly (SRP) syndrome. They noted that polycystic kidneys occur with this condition as well as with Meckel syndrome (249000). Spranger et al. (1974) stated that the most distinctive finding in the Majewski type of SRP syndrome is disproportionate shortening of the tibia. The radiologic appearance of the pelvis is normal and the metaphyseal margins of the tubular bones are regular.
Motegi et al. (1979) appear to have reported the first confirmed instance of Majewski syndrome in sibs (2 brothers).
Chen et al. (1980) reported a case with consanguineous parents. Microscopically, cartilage showed markedly stunted and disorganized endochondral ossification. Extraskeletal manifestations were hydrops, cleft lip, malformed larynx with hypoplastic epiglottis, pulmonary hypoplasia, glomerular and renal tubular cysts, ambiguous genitalia, pachygyria, and small cerebellar vermis.
Cooper and Hall (1982) reported 3 cases and compared them with 5 other fully documented cases. Two were sibs and 2 previously born children in this family had been affected also; all 4 were male. One case was the offspring of first-cousin Pakistani parents. The authors knew of other cases of the Majewski type of SRPS in Pakistani immigrant families in England. Central harelip and cleft palate were consistent features. The striking oval configuration of the tibias was noted.
Silengo et al. (1987) presented 2 patients who they suggested lent support to the idea that the Mohr (252100) and the Majewski syndromes are mild and severe expressions, respectively, of the same autosomal recessive disorder. The 2 patients had features typical of Mohr syndrome but, in addition, had laryngeal anomalies and hallucal and postaxial polysyndactyly of the feet typical of Majewski syndrome. In the latter condition, the oral/facial findings are almost identical to those of the Mohr syndrome. Franceschini et al. (1995) reported on a patient with manifestations typical of Mohr syndrome and of the short rib-polydactyly syndromes. Neri et al. (1995) suggested that this group of disorders, which they referred to as oral-facial-skeletal syndromes, may turn out to be a family of disorders such as the achondroplasia/craniosynostosis syndromes which had shortly before been traced to mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor genes and the achondrogenesis/SED congenita/Stickler complex due to mutation in collagen type II and XI genes.
Thiel et al. (2011) investigated 3 probands, including 2 fetuses and an infant who died 1 hour after birth, with SRPS type II (Majewski) from 3 independent families: 2 consanguineous families of Turkish and Bedouin origin, respectively, and 1 nonconsanguineous family of German origin. All affected individuals had a narrow thorax with hypoplastic lungs, extreme polysyndactyly, disproportionate dwarfism, and median cleft lip and palate. One presented with a ventriculoseptal defect and cystic kidneys. The radiographic hallmarks of all probands included shortened and horizontal ribs, squared scapulae and elevated clavicles with lateral kinking, normal spine and pelvis configuration, and shortening of the bones of all 4 extremities, with extreme reduction of tibial bone length.
Clinical Variability
McInerney-Leo et al. (2015) reported a 3-year-old girl from the British Isles (patient SKDP-126.3) who exhibited short stature, hyperopia, microform cleft lip, pectus carinatum, narrow thorax with bifurcated ribs, mesomelic shortening of the limbs with significantly short tibiae, brachydactyly, and hypermobile joints. The child also showed gross motor and speech delays, and had macrocephaly that was believed to be secondary to hydrocephalus. She had no renal or cardiac anomalies. The tentative diagnosis was Jeune asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy versus Sensenbrenner syndrome.
Wang et al. (2017) reported a 12.5-year-old Caucasian boy who was considered healthy until age 7 years, when his vision deteriorated abruptly and he was diagnosed with hyperopia, astigmatism, and neuroretinal degeneration. Electroretinography (ERG) at age 11 years showed severe generalized retinal dystrophy. Skeletal dysplasia was diagnosed at age 8 years, when narrow thorax and hyperflexible finger joints were observed. Skeletal survey revealed narrow thorax with short ribs, mild platyspondyly with rounded vertebral bodies, underdeveloped lower pelvis, sclerotic proximal femoral metaphyses and mild metaphyseal broadening of the distal femora and proximal tibia. Echocardiography showed mild insufficiency of bicuspid and tricuspid valves. Laboratory tests including hepatic and renal evaluation were normal. The patient was given a clinical diagnosis of axial spondylometaphyseal dysplasia.



EHMT1
**Kleefstra syndrome 1, 610253 (3), AD**
Submicroscopic subtelomeric deletions of chromosome 9q are associated with a recognizable mental retardation syndrome (Harada et al., 2004; Iwakoshi et al., 2004; Stewart et al., 2004; Neas et al., 2005). Common features in patients with 9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome are severe mental retardation, hypotonia, brachy(micro)cephaly, epileptic seizures, flat face with hypertelorism, synophrys, anteverted nares, everted lower lip, carp mouth with macroglossia, and heart defects.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Kleefstra Syndrome
KLEFS2 (617768) is caused by mutation in the KMT2C gene (606833) on chromosome 7q36.
Kleefstra et al. (2009) reported 16 patients with 9q deletions identified by routine chromosome testing or whole genome array analysis and 6 additional patients with intragenic EHMT1 mutations and normal chromosome studies. All patients showed the core phenotype of the deletion syndrome, including mental retardation without speech development, hypotonia, and characteristic facial features. Facial features included microcephaly, brachycephaly, hypertelorism, synophrys, midface hypoplasia, protruding tongue, eversion of the lower lip, and prognathism. Birth weight was often increased compared to normal and many had childhood obesity. Motor function was delayed, but all individuals were able to walk between 2 and 3 years, except 1 patient. Eight patients had congenital heart defects, including atrial or ventricular septal defects, tetralogy of Fallot, aortic coarctation, bicuspid aortic valve, and pulmonic stenosis. Seven patients had seizures. Less common and variable features included micropenis, cryptorchidism, vesicoureteral reflux, tracheo-/bronchomalacia, and gastroesophageal reflux. Brain imaging was generally normal, but some showed dilated ventricles, abnormal myelination, or other mild changes. Five patients that reached adult age showed abrupt behavioral changes around adolescence with some later recovery. Abnormalities included apathy, aggressive periods, psychosis, autistic features, catatonia, bipolar mood disorder, and regression in daily function and cognitive abilities. There were no apparent genotype/phenotype correlations with the size of the deletion or between those with deletions and those with mutations. Kleefstra et al. (2009) concluded that haploinsufficiency for the EHMT1 gene is responsible for the main phenotypic features.
Verhoeven et al. (2011) reviewed the clinical histories of 3 unrelated women, aged 43, 33, and 19 years, with Kleefstra syndrome. Two had a heterozygous intragenic loss-of-function mutation in the EHMT1 gene and the third had a heterozygous 9q34.3 microdeletion encompassing the EHMT1 gene. All had delayed psychomotor development since early childhood, and showed progressive regression in behavior. The oldest patient showed a decline in global functioning beginning at age 38 years and necessitating institutionalization. The other 2 patients showed onset of behavioral regression around puberty. On physical examination as adults, all showed the characteristic facial features of Kleefstra syndrome, as well as rigid flexion of the arms, legs, hands, and feet and slow motor functioning. Abnormal behaviors included impulsivity, poor speech, repetitive behaviors, restricted social interactions, apathy, and poor response to external stimuli. All were severely disabled. The 2 older patients showed signs of catatonia, and both had white matter abnormalities on brain imaging. All patients had a disturbed sleep-wake pattern. The findings were consistent with a neurodegenerative or regressive neurologic process.



CHD7
**CHARGE syndrome, 214800 (3), AD**
CHARGE syndrome is characterized by a pattern of congenital anomalies including choanal atresia and malformations of the heart, inner ear, and retina (summary by Kallen et al., 1999).
Choanal atresia (see 608911) is a feature of the CHARGE association: coloboma of the eye; heart anomaly; atresia, choanal; retardation of mental and somatic development; microphallus; ear abnormalities and/or deafness (Pagon et al., 1981). Facial palsy, cleft palate, and dysphagia are commonly associated. The first descriptions of this syndrome were provided by Hall (1979) and Hittner et al. (1979). Hall (1979) reported a constellation of nonrandomly associated malformations occurring with choanal atresia. Hittner et al. (1979) reported 10 individuals, including a mother and child, with colobomatous microphthalmia, heart disease, abnormalities of the external ear with associated hearing loss, and mental retardation. They noted that multiple other anomalies may be associated.
Koletzko and Majewski (1984) described 6 patients with choanal atresia and additional malformations and reviewed 11 previously reported cases. Their findings validated the CHARGE association but suggested the inclusion of orofacial clefts and esophageal atresia as main features. A certain degree of dysmorphism (low-set and dysplastic ears, retrogenia, antimongoloid slant of palpebral fissures, anteverted nares) was observed in each of their 6 patients. Infants with bilateral choanal atresia plus cardiac defects and those with choanal atresia plus renal malformations had a high mortality rate. Recurrence risk is low.
Davenport et al. (1986) described 15 cases, 9 sporadic and 6 familial. They concluded that CHARGE is a recognizable pattern of malformations and a true syndrome rather than an association. They pointed to external ear malformations (see their photographs) and a 'wedge-shaped' audiogram that may be unique features valuable in diagnosis. Mixed conductive and sensorineural deafness causes an audiogram with a descending bone conduction curve intersecting at low frequencies with a flat curve for air conduction. Congenital facial paralysis occurs in few other conditions. Feeding difficulties are striking even in the absence of cleft palate or tracheoesophageal fistula.
Metlay et al. (1987) reported a patient with CHARGE syndrome as manifested by coloboma of the optic nerve head, congenital heart defect (ASD, VSD, and parachute mitral valve), choanal atresia, severe growth retardation, genital hypoplasia, abnormal ears, cleft lip and palate, and pectus carinatum. He died at 19 months of age. His mother was short and had hearing impairment, choanal atresia, and a coloboma of the left iris. Reported familial cases were tabulated. Tetralogy of Fallot is the most frequent type of heart defect reported in the CHARGE association (Cyran et al., 1987). Ivarsson et al. (1988) reported supravalvular and peripheral pulmonary stenosis in a patient with CHARGE association who also had an atrial septal defect.
Oley et al. (1988) described 14 boys and 6 girls, including monozygotic twins, who all had at least 4 of the 7 major features included in the mnemonic CHARGE. All had ear anomalies or deafness or both and either coloboma or choanal atresia or both. All the boys had evidence of hypogonadism. Many had a characteristic facial appearance: unusually shaped ears, unilateral facial palsy, square face, malar flattening, and pinched nostrils. All were sporadic cases.
Hurst et al. (1989) reported a brother and sister who had atrial septal defect and ventricular septal defect, short stature, microcephaly, developmental delay, and similar dysmorphic facial appearance. The boy had bilateral choanal hypoplasia and stenosis, and Hurst et al. (1989) suspected that the girl had mild choanal stenosis because she had problems in feeding and sucking in the first few months of life. Bialer and Brown (1990) argued that the diagnosis was indeed the CHARGE association in the case of the sibs reported by Hurst et al. (1989).
Meinecke et al. (1989) described the rare association of cutaneous syndactyly and nail hypoplasia with the more frequent features of the CHARGE syndrome.
Blake et al. (1990) reviewed the clinical experience of 50 patients with CHARGE syndrome. Lin et al. (1990) reviewed 136 patients from the literature and added 8 more. In 47 of these, either a postmortem examination or a computerized axial tomography of the head had been performed. Of the 47, 26 (55%) had definite central nervous system malformations, predominantly forebrain anomalies, particularly arhinencephaly and holoprosencephaly. The presence of CNS malformation was most strongly associated with choanal atresia.
Van Meter and Weaver (1996) reported 2 infants (a male and a female) with significant overlap of symptoms of CHARGE association and Goldenhar anomaly (164210). In addition, both infants had plagiocephaly and torticollis, and the boy had cleft lip, heminostril, and tracheoesophageal fistula. The authors suggested that deficiency in migration of neural crest cells, deficiency of mesodermal formation, or defective interaction between neural crest cells and mesoderm may explain the pathogenesis of these defects of blastogenesis.
Tellier et al. (1998) evaluated 47 CHARGE patients for the frequency of major anomalies, namely, coloboma (79%), heart malformation (85%), choanal atresia (57%), growth and/or mental retardation (100%), genital anomalies (34%), ear anomalies (91%), and/or deafness (62%). In addition, they commented on anomalies observed frequently in neonates and infants with the CHARGE syndrome, including minor facial anomalies, neonatal brainstem dysfunction with cranial nerve palsy, and internal ear anomalies such as semicircular canal hypoplasia, which was found in each patient that could be tested. Criteria for poor survival were thought to include male gender, central nervous system and/or esophageal malformations, and bilateral choanal atresia. A significantly higher mean paternal age at conception together with concordance in monozygotic twins and the existence of rare familial cases supported the role of genetic factors such as de novo dominant mutation or subtle submicroscopic chromosome rearrangement.
The G of the CHARGE association represents genital hypoplasia, which is typically recognized only in males (micropenis/cryptorchidism). On the basis of 9 individuals with CHARGE association, Wheeler et al. (2000) identified hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, manifested by hypogenitalism and gonadotropins at or below minimal detectable levels at ages when these hormones should be readily measurable. The authors suggested that central hypogonadism is responsible not only for the genital hypoplasia in male patients but also for the lack of secondary sexual development in patients of both sexes. Measurement of serum luteinizing hormone (see 152780) and follicle-stimulating hormone (see 136530) in infants may help establish the diagnosis; these determinations in teenagers with CHARGE association can result in early diagnosis of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, allowing for treatment of hormonal deficiencies and minimization of potential secondary psychosocial and medical problems.
Sanlaville et al. (2006) examined 10 fetuses from pregnancies that were terminated due to severe malformations seen on ultrasound; all of the fetuses had truncating mutations of the CHD7 gene. They identified 3 constant features: anomalies of the external ear, agenesis or hypoplasia of the semicircular canals, and arhinencephaly. Features occurring in at least 7 of 10 cases included genital anomalies, thymic hypoplasia, ocular coloboma, CNS anomalies other than arhinencephaly, choanal atresia or cleft palate, and heart defects. Sanlaville et al. (2006) concluded that semicircular canal agenesis and arhinencephaly are highly predictive diagnostic criteria for CHARGE syndrome, and suggested that they be added to the major diagnostic criteria for the disorder.
Vervloed et al. (2006) studied associations between behavior and medical problems in 27 patients with CHARGE syndrome and found that of all medical conditions, only the presence or absence of heart defects and cardiac surgery could differentiate between the patients with regard to the number of behavioral problems. Long hospital stays were associated with less problem behavior. Cerebral and heart problems did not result in longer hospital stays, whereas esophageal reflux did. The study did not confirm a significant association between medical conditions and autism found in previous studies. Vervloed et al. (2006) noted that while heart surgery and hospitalization may be protective factors, related variables such as reduced vitality or altered parent-child interactions after heart surgery may be the actual cause.
Delahaye et al. (2007) reported 2 unrelated families with dominant transmission of CHARGE syndrome due to pathogenic CHD7 mutations. In both families, the syndrome was phenotypically identified in 1 parent with very mild signs only after the diagnosis of their affected children, who had severe manifestations. Although detailed studies were not performed, the authors suggested that somatic mosaicism may have occurred in the parents. The report emphasized the intrafamilial variability of the syndrome.
By analyzing physician-completed questionnaires based on 99 CHARGE patients in Canada, Blake et al. (2008) found that 92% of patients exhibited symptoms of at least 1 cranial nerve anomaly, and 72% had involvement of more than 1. Involvement of CN IX and X was the most common (68.7%), followed by CN VIII auditory (56.6%), CN V (55.6%), CN VII (31.3%), and CN VIII vestibular (22.2%). Blake et al. (2008) suggested that involvement of some of these nerves may underlie the sucking, chewing, and swallowing difficulties often observed in patients with CHARGE syndrome.
In 3 of 36 patients with an initial clinical diagnosis of Kallmann syndrome, Jongmans et al. (2009) identified de novo heterozygous mutations in the CHD7 gene. Further evaluation of the 3 patients showed that each had additional clinical features consistent with CHARGE syndrome, including deafness, tooth agenesis, dysmorphic ears, coloboma, and short stature. Jongmans et al. (2009) concluded that patients with anosmia and/or hypogonadotropic hypogonadism should be screened for additional clinical features of CHARGE syndrome.
Layman et al. (2009) noted that olfactory defects and olfactory bulb hypoplasia have been previously reported in individuals with CHARGE syndrome. In 5 of 8 individuals with CHARGE due to confirmed CHD7 mutations, they found severe defects in olfaction on the Brief Smell Identification Test (BSIT). Of note, 3 CHARGE patients with mutation in exon 33 of the CHD7 gene did well on the olfaction test, scoring at or near normal.
In 3 members of a Finnish family with CHARGE syndrome, Vuorela et al. (2008) identified a nonsense mutation in the CHD7 gene (608892.0017). The male infant proband and a male fetus from a second pregnancy both had absence of the olfactory bulbs in addition to other features consistent with CHARGE syndrome. The male infant, who died at 3 months of age, also had marked isomerism of the liver with significant symmetry of the right side-appearing lobes and a midline gallbladder, as well as extrahepatic bile duct obstruction and significant hyporotation of the intestines. Their father, in whom the mutation was found in peripheral blood lymphocytes and in buccal cells, had minimal findings, with left-sided conductive hearing loss, a dysplastic, cup-shaped right external ear, slightly asymmetric face, and nonspecific degenerative retinal lesion of the right eye. Vuorela et al. (2008) concluded that a healthy or nearly healthy parent of a CHARGE child may carry a CHD7 mutation, which has implications for genetic counseling.
**Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 5 with or without anosmia, 612370 (3), AD**
Congenital idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) is a disorder characterized by absent or incomplete sexual maturation by the age of 18 years, in conjunction with low levels of circulating gonadotropins and testosterone and no other abnormalities of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. Idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism can be caused by an isolated defect in gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GNRH; 152760) release, action, or both. Other associated nonreproductive phenotypes, such as anosmia, cleft palate, and sensorineural hearing loss, occur with variable frequency. In the presence of anosmia, idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism has been called 'Kallmann syndrome (KS),' whereas in the presence of a normal sense of smell, it has been termed 'normosmic idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (nIHH)' (summary by Raivio et al., 2007). Because families have been found to segregate both KS and nIHH, the disorder is here referred to as 'hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with or without anosmia (HH).'
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with or without anosmia, see 147950.



INSR
**Diabetes mellitus, insulin-resistant, with acanthosis nigricans, 610549 (3)**
Kahn et al. (1976) divided the syndrome of insulin resistance and acanthosis nigricans into two: type A, a syndrome of younger females with signs of virilization and accelerated growth in whom a defect in cell receptors for insulin may be primary; and type B, a syndrome in older females with signs of an immunologic disease in whom circulating antibodies to the insulin receptor are found. Although no familial cases were found, they commented that all their patients and those in the literature were female; most were black, although the syndrome has been observed in persons of American Indian, Italian, Venezuelan, and Japanese origin. Despite insulin resistance, ketoacidosis was rare. Females with the type A syndrome have polycystic ovaries.
Rudiger et al. (1983) described 3 sibs with mild diabetes in combination with acanthosis nigricans and minor physical abnormalities: bitemporal narrowing of the skull, paucity of body fat, acral hypertrophy (enlarged ears, nose, chin, and finger tips), brachydactyly, protrusion of the eye globes, and dental anomalies (supernumerary teeth, severe and premature caries, abnormally prominent lower canines and upper incisors). Fasting plasma insulin was 100 times normal. Insulin-binding was defective. Scatchard analysis showed a normal number of insulin-binding sites per cell but a complete lack of insulin binding to the high-affinity receptor component.
In patients with an inherited affinity defect of the insulin receptor, Rudiger et al. (1985) found that stimulation of glucose uptake, an early effect of insulin, was normal, but insulin-mediated stimulation of RNA synthesis, a late effect, was defective. Both the affinity defect and the deficient stimulation of RNA synthesis were apparent at low concentrations of insulin only and disappeared at very high concentrations.
Mariani et al. (1982) described a 6.3-year-old girl with acanthosis nigricans, insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus, hypertelorism, prognathism, macroglossia, and large ears. Generalized hypertrichosis and hypertrophy of the clitoris were present. A decrease in the number of insulin receptors was demonstrated. In the patient reported by Leme et al. (1982), polycystic ovaries were also present. Insulin resistance with acanthosis nigricans but with normal receptors may have a postreceptor defect (Bar et al., 1978). Prince et al. (1986) studied a 15-year-old black female with menstrual irregularity, mild hirsutism, and marked acanthosis nigricans that was first noted at age 4 years. Insulin receptors on cultured fibroblasts were decreased and the remaining receptors showed a functional impairment. Perhaps one should speak of types A1 and A2 of insulin-resistance and acanthosis nigricans (IRAN), type A2 being a form with a postbinding defect.
Grigorescu et al. (1984) and Grunberger et al. (1984) described patients with type A insulin resistance and decreased insulin receptor kinase activity. In 2 patients with type A extreme insulin resistance, sisters who were the products of a consanguineous marriage, Ojamaa et al. (1988) found normal levels of insulin receptor mRNA. They had previously shown that the insulin receptor precursor is synthesized at a normal rate in these patients, thus suggesting a defect in the posttranslational processing of the receptor or in its translocation to the plasma membrane. See review by Kahn and White (1988).
Schwenk et al. (1986) observed acanthosis nigricans in a white family; the mother and 3 daughters (including a set of identical twins) had acanthosis nigricans. Three sons were normal. Two of the 4 affected females had no apparent ovarian dysfunction, whereas 2 had hyperprolactinemia without other findings of polycystic ovary disease (184700). The twins had muscle cramps (see 200170). All had normal red cell and monocyte binding of insulin. Insulin responsiveness, on the other hand, was reduced, suggesting a postbinding defect. They raised the question of autosomal dominant inheritance.
Seemanova et al. (1992) investigated a family in which at least 4 men in 3 generations had a syndrome of obesity, mild mental retardation, delayed puberty, macroorchidism, acanthosis nigricans, hyperinsulinemia, and, later, overt insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus (noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, or type II diabetes). The patients had markedly curly scalp hair and deficient hair of the face and body. Teeth were normal. There was normal insulin binding to fibroblasts; however, insulin-stimulated RNA synthesis was decreased as compared to that of normal control individuals, suggesting a postbinding defect in insulin action. The pedigree showed an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance.
**Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia, familial, 5, 609968 (3), AD**
Hojlund et al. (2004) described a large 3-generation Danish family in which affected members had postprandial episodes of neuroglycopenia. The proband was a 21-year-old woman who since the age of 12 had experienced episodes of blurred vision, loss of consciousness, and seizures, occurring 2 to 5 hours after eating, often in conjunction with exercise and relieved by food ingestion. Her EEG was normal. At age 20, hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia was documented; the patient was noted to be nonobese with no signs of insulin resistance such as skin pigmentation or hirsutism. Nine other family members in 3 generations also had episodes of hypoglycemia which ranged from moderate symptoms of hypoglycemia in 2 family members to episodes with loss of consciousness in 8 and seizures causing admission to emergency units in 5. The reported age of onset was between 3 and 30 years, and all affected family members were shown to have fasting hyperinsulinemia and an elevated serum insulin-to-C-peptide ratio. The proband's sister, who had moderate symptoms of hypoglycemia, showed mild skin pigmentation in the axillae, increased total and free serum levels of testosterone, and polycystic ovaries.
**Leprechaunism, 246200 (3), AR**
Among the children of second cousins once removed, Donohue and Uchida (1954) observed 2 sisters with the following features: apparent cessation of growth at about the seventh month of gestation, peculiar facies creating a gnomelike appearance and leading to the designation, and severe endocrine disturbance indicated by emaciation, enlargement of breasts and clitoris, and histologic changes in the ovaries, pancreas and breasts. Three abortions (1 child at 4 months, the others earlier) had been experienced by this mother. The patients died at 46 and 66 days of age, respectively.
Two affected sisters were reported by Lakatos et al. (1963). Salmon and Webb (1963) observed a patient with consanguineous parents. Dekaban (1965) found normal chromosomes. Der Kaloustian et al. (1971) described 2 unrelated patients born of consanguineous parents.
Schilling et al. (1979) found a defect in insulin receptors in a Canadian Indian infant, the son of first cousins once removed. Emaciation, absence of subcutaneous fat, decreased muscle mass, hirsutism, and low-set, poorly developed ears were features. Sudden death occurred at age 47 days. Profound hyperinsulinemia and insulin receptor function in cultured fibroblasts. At autopsy, marked hypertrophy of pancreatic beta cells was noted. Epidermal growth factor, although chemically related to insulin, showed normal binding.
Bier et al. (1980) concluded that hypoglycemia in leprechaunism is due to an accelerated fasting state. Elfin facial appearance, growth retardation, severely diminished subcutaneous adipose tissue stores, decreased muscle mass, hypertrichosis, pachyderma, and acanthosis nigricans were cited as notable clinical features. See Seip syndrome (269700).
Elsas et al. (1985) stated that 31 patients with leprechaunism had been reported since the original description by Donohue (1948). They summarized the phenotype as follows: severe intrauterine growth retardation; small, elfin-like face with protuberant ears; distended abdomen; relatively large hands, feet, and genitalia; and abnormal skin with hypertrichosis, acanthosis nigricans, and decreased subcutaneous fat. At autopsy, patients have shown cystic changes in membranes of gonads and hyperplasia of pancreatic islet cells.
Taylor et al. (1981) studied cultured lymphocytes from a patient with leprechaunism and extreme insulin resistance previously attributed to a postreceptor defect (Kobayashi et al., 1978). They found that in fact the patient had an inborn error affecting insulin receptor function. Receptor binding was abnormal in having decreased sensitivity to alterations in temperature and pH. However, the level of insulin binding to cells from the patient was within normal limits. Thus, insulin resistance probably resulted from a decreased ability of the receptor to couple insulin binding to insulin action.
From studies of an infant with leprechaunism and the parents, Elsas et al. (1985) concluded that the family had 2 different recessive mutations that impair high-affinity insulin-receptor binding and that the proband was a genetic compound. The 2 mutations produced structural changes in the receptor that altered subunit interaction and resulted in loss of high-affinity binding and cellular responsiveness. After oral glucose, the proband showed marked hyperinsulinism, the father showed mild hyperinsulinism, and the mother had a normal response. The proband's fibroblasts had no high-affinity binding of insulin but normal low-affinity binding. Cells from the mother had 60% and those from the father 20% of high-affinity binding and normal low-affinity binding. The patient studied by Elsas et al. (1985), a black female, was 8 years old at the time of report. Most patients have died by the age of 10 months. The same patient, designated 'Arkansas I,' was studied by Kobayashi et al. (1978), Taylor et al. (1981), and others. In studies of probands and parents from 3 unrelated families, Endo et al. (1987) demonstrated heterogeneity of a defect in insulin receptor. One of the 3, 'Arkansas I,' showed defective alpha-subunit interaction.
Geffner et al. (1987) studied a female patient with very high levels of insulin. There was evidence of residual insulin activity in the form of cystic ovarian enlargement with gonadotropin-independent steroid secretion and persistent, severe myocardial hypertrophy. Geffner et al. (1987) concluded that the response to supraphysiologic concentrations of insulin was mediated via the insulin-like growth factor receptor mechanism which remained intact.
Cantani et al. (1987) reviewed 49 published cases.
Reddy et al. (1988) studied insulin receptor function in cultured skin fibroblasts from 3 patients with leprechaunism. The cell lines in all 3 patients showed insulin binding less than 15% of control values. In 1 cell line this was primarily due to reduced affinity of the receptor; in the other 2, it was due to a reduced number of receptors. When expressed as a fraction of total insulin bound, the percentage of cell-associated insulin internalized and degraded did not differ between the patient cell lines and the controls. Reddy et al. (1989) characterized a second family of leprechaunism (Ark-2) and found defects of insulin receptor phosphorylation in the phenotypically normal parents.
Reddy and Kahn (1989) demonstrated a functional abnormality of the epidermal growth factor receptor (131550), as well as of the insulin receptor, in 3 unrelated patients with leprechaunism. The abnormality was due to a decrease in receptor affinity in 2 of the cases and to a decrease in receptor number in the third. In all 3 cell lines studied, EGF-stimulated receptor autophosphorylation was also decreased, whereas EGF internalization and degradation were normal. The type A syndrome of insulin resistance and acanthosis nigricans showed no abnormality of EGF receptor. Reddy and Kahn (1989) proposed that 'a more fundamental defect beyond the insulin receptor alone is the probable cause of leprechaunism.'
Psiachou et al. (1993) reported a female infant with leprechaunism who was homozygous for a mutation in the INSR gene. Both parents, who were first cousins, were heterozygous for the mutant allele and phenotypically and clinically normal. The patient, who died at 4 months of age, had grossly retarded bone age, with the distal femoral epiphysis not being evident at 3 months of age. She had high fasting growth hormone (GH) values without a rise in IGF-I concentrations as well as an inadequate response to exogenously administered GH, implying growth hormone resistance. Psiachou et al. (1993) suggested that this resistance was a secondary effect caused by downregulation of GH receptor activity in the presence of high concentrations of insulin proximal to the cell membrane, with consequent limitation of IGF-I formation and cellular growth. Thus, although the primary defect in leprechaunism is in the insulin receptor gene, a secondary defect is probably responsible for an impaired response to endogenous GH and growth failure.
In a Yemeni family, Al-Gazali et al. (1993) observed what they considered to be a mild form of leprechaunism in 4 males and 1 female out of 8 offspring of second-cousin parents. The patients had insulin resistance with paradoxical hypoglycemia and acanthosis nigricans. However, unlike infants with classic leprechaunism who die in the first year of life, all the children were alive, the oldest being 11 years of age; furthermore, all had normal subcutaneous tissue and some showed a normal growth pattern. Ultrasound studies showed thickened myocardium and enlarged kidneys, and the female had ovarian enlargement.
**Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome, 262190 (3), AR**
Rabson and Mendenhall (1956) described 3 sibs (2 girls, 1 boy) who initially presented with dental and skin abnormalities, abdominal distention, and phallic enlargement. The children demonstrated early dentition, a coarse, senile-appearing facies, and striking hirsutism. An 'adult growth of hair of head' at 5 years of age was pictured in the case of one of the girls. In the older girl the genitalia were large enough at the age of 6 months to permit vaginal examination for diagnosis of a left ovarian tumor which was removed soon afterward. The children were mentally precocious. Prognathism and very thick fingernails as well as acanthosis nigricans were also described. Insulin-resistant diabetes developed, and the patients died during childhood of ketoacidosis and intercurrent infections. At necropsy pineal hyperplasia was found in all 3. Rabson and Mendenhall (1956) stated that 'the histories...gain in value because the family physician (E.N.M.) brought them and their siblings into the world, and cared for them until they died...' Cases probably of the same condition in 2 sisters, offspring of first-cousin parents, were described by Barnes et al. (1974). They did not have abnormality of the teeth and nails and were living at ages 23 and 11 years, when reported. (Accili et al. (1989) demonstrated that these 2 sisters had a point mutation of the insulin receptor gene (147670.0011).) West et al. (1975) described brother and sister with the syndrome. They showed unusual facies, dry skin, acanthosis nigricans, thickened nails, hirsutism, dental precocity and dysplasia, abdominal protuberance, and phallic enlargement. Both had diabetic ketoacidosis with insulin resistance. The elder, a girl, had recurrent sepsis and died at the age of 7.8 years. The pineal body was hyperplastic at autopsy. West and Leonard (1980) gave follow-up information on the surviving brother, aged 12 years. Monocyte-binding studies suggested that the condition is a genetic deficiency of insulin receptors.



PCCB
**Propionicacidemia, 606054 (3), AR**
Propionic acidemia is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder caused by defective functioning in the mitochondrial enzyme propionyl CoA carboxylase (PCC), resulting in the accumulation of propionic acid metabolites, and dysfunction in the respiratory chain and urea cycle pathways. The disorder is clinically heterogeneous. A neonatal-onset form is characterized by poor feeding, vomiting, and fatigue in the first days of life in a previously healthy infant, and if untreated, may be followed by lethargy, seizures, coma, and death. The neonatal form is frequently accompanied by metabolic acidosis with anion gap, ketonuria, hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia, and cytopenia. A late-onset form in older children and adults has a milder phenotype, is less common, and may present with developmental regression, chronic vomiting, protein intolerance, failure to thrive, hypotonia, and occasionally basal ganglia infarction, which may result in dystonia and choreoathetosis, and cardiomyopathy. Metabolically unstable individuals can have an acute decompensation that resembles the neonatal presentation, often precipitated by a catabolic stress such as infection, injury, or surgery, or an excessive intake of intact (i.e., complete, dietary, or natural) protein. Long-term manifestations of neonatal and late onset of propionic acidemia can include growth impairment, intellectual disability, seizures, basal ganglia lesions, pancreatitis, and cardiomyopathy. Other less common manifestations include optic atrophy, hearing loss, premature ovarian insufficiency, and chronic renal failure (summary by Jurecki et al., 2019).
The features of propionic acidemia are episodic vomiting, lethargy and ketosis, neutropenia, periodic thrombocytopenia, hypogammaglobulinemia, developmental retardation, and intolerance to protein. Outstanding chemical features are hyperglycinemia and hyperglycinuria. This disorder is not to be confused with hereditary glycinuria (138500), which is an autosomal dominant disorder.
Soriano et al. (1967) suggested that in the disorder first described by Childs et al. (1961), a generalized defect in utilization of amino acids results in excessive deamination of certain amino acids in muscle, with consequent hyperammonemia and ketoacidosis. In a second group of patients whose disorder is also termed hyperglycinemia, ketoacidosis, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia have not been observed and glycine is the only amino acid present in excess in serum and urine; see glycine encephalopathy (605899).
Hsia et al. (1969) studied fibroblasts from a sister of the boy described by Childs et al. (1961) and demonstrated deficient propionate carboxylation as the basic defect in ketotic hyperglycinemia. Hsia et al. (1971) also showed that 'ketotic hyperglycinemia' is the same as propionic acidemia and is the result of a defect in PCC. In further studies on this patient, Brandt et al. (1974) demonstrated that with low protein diet, growth and intelligence developed normally to age 9 years; indeed, intelligence was superior. The family originally reported by Childs et al. (1961) had the pccA type of propionic acidemia (Wolf, 1986).
In a male Pakistani offspring of first-cousin parents, Gompertz et al. (1970) described acidosis and ketosis due to propionic acidemia, leading to death at 8 days of age. A sib had died at 2 weeks of age with metabolic acidosis and ketonuria. The defect was found to involve mitochondrial propionyl-CoA carboxylase. The same condition was described by Hommes et al. (1968).
Al Essa et al. (1998) pointed out that not only do acute intercurrent infections precipitate acidosis in propionic acidemia, but such infections are unusually frequent in propionic acidemia in Saudi Arabia. Propionic acidemia is unusually frequent in Saudi Arabia, with a frequency of 1 in 2,000 to 1 in 5,000, depending on the region. The disorder has a severe phenotype in Saudi Arabia. Al Essa et al. (1998) had information on approximately 90 patients; certain tribes accounted for almost 80% of these cases, suggesting a founder effect. The number of other cases of organic acidemias observed during the same period was 656. Longitudinal data, in some instances up to 8 years, were available for 38 patients with propionic acidemia. A high frequency of infections was observed in 80% of the patients. Most microorganisms implicated were unusual, suggesting an underlying immune deficiency. The infections occurred despite aggressive treatment with appropriate diets, carnitine, and, during acute episodes of the disease, with metronidazole, which suggested a global effect of the disease on T and B lymphocytes as well as on the bone marrow cells.
In a review of inherited metabolic disorders and stroke, Testai and Gorelick (2010) noted that patients with branched-chain organic aciduria, including isovaleric aciduria (243500), propionic aciduria, and methylmalonic aciduria (251000), can rarely have strokes. Cerebellar hemorrhage has been described in all 3 disorders, and basal ganglia ischemic stroke has been described in propionic aciduria and methylmalonic aciduria. These events may occur in the absence of metabolic decompensation.



CBS
**Thrombosis, hyperhomocysteinemic, 236200 (3), AR**
Classic homocystinuria is an autosomal recessive metabolic disorder of sulfur metabolism. The clinical features of untreated homocystinuria due to CBS deficiency usually manifest in the first or second decade of life and include myopia, ectopia lentis, mental retardation, skeletal anomalies resembling Marfan syndrome (MFS; 154700), and thromboembolic events. Light skin and hair can also be present. Biochemical features include increased urinary homocystine and methionine. There are 2 main phenotypes of the classic disorder: a milder pyridoxine (vitamin B6)-responsive form, and a more severe pyridoxine-nonresponsive form. Pyridoxine is a cofactor for the CBS enzyme, and can aid in the conversion of homocysteine to cysteine (summary by Reish et al., 1995 and Testai and Gorelick, 2010).
Some patients have been reported to have a milder form of homocystinuria, which is characterized by increased plasma homocysteine and increased risk for thrombotic events in young adulthood, but without the other skeletal, ocular, or nervous system manifestations observed in classic homocystinuria (Kelly et al., 2003).
Homocystinuria was discovered independently by Gerritsen et al. (1962) in Madison, Wisconsin, and by Carson and Neill (1962) in Belfast, Northern Ireland. The patients of both groups were studied because of mental retardation.
Mudd et al. (1985) compiled data on 629 patients with homocystinuria collected from all parts of the world. Among patients not discovered by newborn screening, mental capabilities were higher in B6-responsive patients (mean IQ, 79) than in B6-nonresponsive patients (mean IQ, 57). Time-to-event curves for other major clinical abnormalities were also presented. For untreated B6-responsive and B6-nonresponsive patients, these were, respectively: chance of dislocation of lenses by age 10, 55% and 82%; chance of having clinically detected thromboembolic event by age 15, 12% and 27%; chance of radiologic detection of spinal osteoporosis by age 15, 36% and 64%,, and chance of not surviving to age 30, 4% and 23%. When initiated neonatally, methionine restriction prevented mental retardation, reduced the rate of lens dislocation, and may have reduced the incidence of seizures. Pyridoxine treatment of late-detected B6-responsive patients reduced the rate of occurrence of initial thromboembolic events. Following 586 surgical procedures, 25 postoperative thromboembolic complications occurred, of which 6 were fatal. Few abnormalities were found in the offspring of either male or female patients, and the evidence was inconclusive concerning the rate of fetal loss from mothers with untreated homocystinuria. Among patients detected neonatally, only 13% were B6-responsive as compared with 47% among late-detected B6-responders.
Abbott et al. (1987) evaluated 63 patients with homocystinuria for psychiatric disturbance, intelligence, evidence of other CNS problems, and responsiveness to vitamin B6. Clinically significant psychiatric disorders were found in 51%. The average IQ was 80; IQ was lower among vitamin B6-nonresponsive patients.
Hypopigmentation is a feature of homocystinuria and can be shown to be reversible in patients with pyridoxine-responsive homocystinuria. Instances have been observed in which darkening of newly growing hair is observed after initiation of pyridoxine therapy, creating a clear demarcation between the old, blond and the new, dark hair (Reish et al., 1995). The consistency of the hair also changed from a coarse to a softer texture.
Yap et al. (2001) studied mental capabilities of 23 pyridoxine-nonresponsive individuals with CBS deficiency with over 339 patient-years of treatment and compared these individuals to those of 10 unaffected sibs (controls). Of the 23 individuals, 19 were diagnosed through newborn screening with early treatment, 2 were late-detected, and 2 were untreated at the time of assessment. Thirteen of the newborn-screened group who were compliant with treatment had no complications, while the remaining 6, who were poorly compliant, developed complications. Good compliance was defined by a lifetime plasma free homocysteine median of less than 11 micromole per liter. The newborn-screened good-compliance group with a mean age of 14.4 years (range 4.4-24.9) had a full-scale IQ of 105.8 (range 84-120), while the poorly compliant group with a mean age of 19.9 years (range 13.8 to 25.5) had a mean full-scale IQ of 80.8 (range 40-103). The control group had a mean age of 19.4 years and a mean IQ of 102. The 2 late-detected patients had IQs of 80 and 102 at the age of almost 19 years, while the 2 untreated patients had IQs in the mid-fifties at the age of 22 and 11 years.
In a review, Testai and Gorelick (2010) noted that thromboembolic events are the most common cause of death in patients with classic homocystinuria and can manifest as peripheral vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, stroke, peripheral artery occlusion, and myocardial infarction. The risk of having a vascular event is 25% before age 16 years and 50% by age 30 years.
Clinical Variability: Thrombotic Hyperhomocysteinemia, CBS-Related
Gaustadnes et al. (2000) found that 3 of 5 unrelated patients with severe hyperhomocysteinemia and thrombosis, but no other features of classic homocystinuria, were compound heterozygous for mutations in the CBS gene, consistent with CBS deficiency.
Maclean et al. (2002) reported 2 unrelated Danish patients who presented with transient ischemic attacks at age 36 and 22 years, respectively. Biochemical studies showed increased serum homocysteine, but neither had other features of classic homocystinuria such as mental retardation, ectopia lentis, or skeletal changes. Each patient was compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in the CBS gene: one with D444N (613381.0010) and P422L (613381.0013), and the other with I278T (613381.0004) and S466L (613381.0014). In vitro functional expression studies showed that the P422L and S466L mutant proteins were catalytically active and even had higher activity than wildtype, but were impaired in regulation by AdoMet. The findings illustrated the importance of AdoMet for the regulation of homocysteine metabolism.
Kelly et al. (2003) reported 3 unrelated patients with premature stroke and severe hyperhomocysteinemia. Excluding tall stature in 2 patients, none had clinical features of classic homocystinuria. All had increased serum methionine and increased urinary homocystine. Molecular analysis found that each patient was heterozygous for a different CBS mutation (I278T, 613381.0004; D444N, 613381.0010, and G307S, 613381.0001); however, the possibility for another unidentified CBS mutation could not be ruled out. The report expanded the phenotypic variability associated with CBS mutations to include premature stroke and hyperhomocysteinemia without the classic findings of CBS deficiency. The findings also suggested that increased serum homocysteine can be associated with early-onset stroke (see 603174).



NEDD4L
**Periventricular nodular heterotopia 7, 617201 (3), AD**
Periventricular nodular heterotopia-7 is a neurologic disorder characterized by abnormal neuronal migration during brain development resulting in delayed psychomotor development and intellectual disability; some patients may develop seizures. Other features include cleft palate and 2-3 toe syndactyly (summary by Broix et al., 2016).
For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of periventricular heterotopia, see 300049.
Broix et al. (2016) reported 6 unrelated children with delayed psychomotor development apparent since infancy, intellectual disability, and poor or absent speech. One patient had a similarly affected sib. Most patients had truncal hypotonia, and 1 patient was unable to sit or walk at age 6 years. Five patients had cleft palate, 1 had a bifid uvula, and all but 1 had 2-3 toe syndactyly. Four patients had seizures, including 2 with onset at 4 to 5 months of age. Brain imaging showed periventricular nodular heterotopia in all patients; 1 patient also had frontal cortical dysplasia, another had polymicrogyria, and 2 had a dysmorphic corpus callosum. Some patients had inconsistent dysmorphic facial features, such as micrognathia, deep-set eyes, and small nose. Additional variable features found in 1 or 2 patients included hearing impairment, optic atrophy, strabismus, myopia, cryptorchidism, and contractures.



HCN1
**Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 24, 615871 (3), AD**
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy-24 (DEE24) is a neurologic disorder characterized by onset of refractory seizures in infancy, severely impaired global development, intellectual disability, and behavioral abnormalities. Most patients have onset of variable types of seizures between 4 and 13 months of age, but earlier onset in the first days of life has also been reported. Seizures are often triggered by fever, at least initially; status epilepticus may occur (summary by Nava et al., 2014 and Marini et al., 2018).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of DEE, see 308350.
Nava et al. (2014) reported 6 unrelated patients of European descent with DEE24. The patients had onset of pharmacoresistant febrile seizures between 4 and 13 months of age. Seizure type at onset tended to be tonic-clonic or hemiclonic but evolved into predominantly focal absence and myoclonic later in childhood. Four patients had status epilepticus. All patients had intellectual disability of varying degrees, and most had behavioral disturbances or autistic features. Two had ataxia. Brain imaging was normal.
Marini et al. (2018) reported 8 unrelated patients with DEE24. The patients had onset of various types of refractory seizures in infancy. Seizure types included severe febrile seizures, focal, tonic, atonic, myoclonic-atonic, and tonic-clonic. Two patients died at 14 and 15 months of age, and the remaining patients had variably impaired intellectual development sometimes with language delay or autistic features. Brain imaging was essentially normal, although some patients had nonspecific white matter abnormalities. EEG showed multifocal and diffuse discharges and paroxysmal abnormalities. Two patients had microcephaly.



SH2D1A
**Lymphoproliferative syndrome, X-linked, 1, 308240 (3), XLR**
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome, or Duncan disease, is a primary immunodeficiency characterized by severe immune dysregulation often after viral infection, typically with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). It is a complex phenotype manifest as severe or fatal mononucleosis, acquired hypogammaglobulinema, hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), and/or malignant lymphoma. Other features may include aplastic anemia, red cell aplasia, and lymphomatoid granulomatosis (Purtilo et al., 1977; Purtilo, 1981; Purtilo and Grierson, 1991; Coffey et al., 1998; Booth et al., 2011).
Genetic Heterogeneity of X-linked/Autosomal Lymphoproliferative Syndrome
See XLP2 (300635), caused by mutation in the XIAP gene (300079), also on Xq25; LPFS1 (613011), caused by mutation in the ITK gene (186973) on chromosome 5q33; LPFS2 (615122), caused by mutation in the CD27 gene (186711) on chromosome 12p13; and LPFS3 (618261), caused by mutation in the CD70 gene (TNFSF7; 602840) on chromosome 19p13.
Purtilo et al. (1974, 1975) reported a kindred by the name of Duncan in which 6 males died between the ages of 2 and 19 years from a lymphoproliferative disease. The subtle, progressive combined variable immunodeficiency disease was characterized by benign or malignant proliferation of lymphocytes and histiocytosis, as well as alterations in concentrations of serum immunoglobulins. In at least 3 of 6 boys, infectious mononucleosis occurred during or preceding the terminal events. Fever, pharyngitis, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, atypical lymphocytosis, and a spectrum ranging from agammaglobulinemia to polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia occurred. At necropsy, the thymus glands and thymic-dependent areas in the lymph nodes and spleen were depleted of lymphocytes. Hematopoietic organs, viscera, and central nervous system were diffusely infiltrated by lymphocytes, plasma cells, and histiocytes, some containing erythrocytes. Two of the 6 males, half sibs, had lymphomas of the ileum and central nervous system. The authors raised the possibility that 'the Epstein-Barr virus or other viruses triggered the fatal proliferation of lymphocytes and that progressive attrition of T-cell function allowed uncontrolled lymphoproliferation.' In addition to the kindred described by Purtilo and his colleagues, the kindred in which 4 young male cousins died of infectious mononucleosis, as reported by Bar et al. (1974), and the kindred with agammaglobulinemia developing after infectious mononucleosis in 3 maternal male cousins, as reported by Provisor et al. (1975), may be examples of Duncan disease.
Hamilton et al. (1980) abbreviated the designation of this disease to XLP (X-linked lymphoproliferative) syndrome. They reported studies of 59 affected males in 7 unrelated kindreds ascertained through an XLP registry. Thirty-four patients died of infectious mononucleosis, 8 had fatal infectious mononucleosis with immunoblastic sarcoma, 9 had depressed immunity following Epstein-Barr virus infection, and 8 developed lymphoma.
Purtilo et al. (1982) reviewed 100 cases of XLP in 25 kindreds, and suggested 4 major interrelated phenotypes: infectious mononucleosis (IM), malignant B-cell lymphoma (ML), aplastic anemia (AA), and hypogammaglobulinemia (HGG). Eighty-one of the patients died; 2 were asymptomatic but showed immunodeficiency to EBV; 75 had IM and, concurrently, 17 of this group had AA; all with AA died within a week. On the other hand, AA did not accompany HGG or ML. In 9, IM appeared to evolve into ML; however, most patients with ML showed no obvious antecedent IM. In 1, IM occurred after recurrent ML. Twenty-six of 35 lymphomas were in the terminal ileum. Heterozygous women (mothers of boys with XLP) showed abnormally elevated titers of antibodies to EBV.
Sullivan et al. (1980) found deficient activity of natural killer (NK) cells from patients with XLP. Sullivan et al. (1983) studied 2 males with XLP before and during acute fatal Epstein-Barr virus infection. Before EBV infection, both showed normal cellular and humoral immunity. Death in both cases was caused by liver failure: one developed extensive hepatic necrosis; the other developed massive infiltration of the liver with EBV-infected immunoblasts after aggressive immunosuppressive therapy. Sullivan et al. (1983) proposed that an aberrant immune response triggered by acute EBV infection results in unregulated anomalous killer and natural killer cell activity against EBV infected and uninfected cells. They further suggested that the global cellular immune defects in males with XLP who survive EBV infection represent an epiphenomenon.
Purtilo and Grierson (1991) reported that during the previous decade 240 males with XLP within 59 unrelated kindreds had been identified worldwide. One-half of the patients had developed fatal infectious mononucleosis at an average age of about 2.5 years, and death occurred on average only 33 days following onset of illness. About one-third had acquired hypogammaglobulinemia and another one-fourth had developed malignant lymphoma, most of which were of the Burkitt type involving the ileocecal region. Although hypogammaglobulinemia and malignant lymphoma were associated with longer survivals, no patient had been documented as living into the fifth decade of life.
Seemayer et al. (1995) reviewed XLP 25 years after Purtilo's first observations in 1969. Purtilo established a registry in 1980 to serve as a worldwide resource for the diagnosis, treatment, and research of this condition. After Purtilo's death in late 1992, the registry and research unit continued to function as a worldwide consultative service. By 1995, some 272 affected members of 80 kindreds had been identified. Approximately 10% of the boys who inherited the mutated XLP gene were immunologically abnormal, even before evidence of EBV exposure.
Coffey et al. (1998) noted that the average age of disease onset in XLP is 2.5 years, with 100% mortality by the age of 40 years. Following infection with EBV, patients mount a vigorous, uncontrolled polyclonal expansion of T and B cells. The primary cause of death is hepatic necrosis and bone marrow failure. The extensive tissue destruction of the liver and bone marrow appears to stem from the uncontrolled cytotoxic T-cell response.
Systemic vasculitis is an uncommon manifestation of XLP. Dutz et al. (2001) described a patient who died as a result of chronic systemic vasculitis and fulfilled clinical criteria for the diagnosis of XLP. Sequencing of the SH2D1A gene revealed a novel point mutation affecting the SH2 domain. The patient presented with virus-associated hemophagocytic syndrome, and later chorioretinitis, bronchiectasis, and hypogammaglobulinemia developed. He further developed mononeuritis and fatal respiratory failure. Evidence of widespread small and medium vessel vasculitis was noted at autopsy with involvement of retinal, cerebral, and coronary arteries as well as the segmental vessels of the kidneys, testes, and pancreas. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the vessel wall infiltrates consisted primarily of CD8+ T cells, implying a cytotoxic T-lymphocyte response to antigen. Epstein-Barr virus DNA was detected by PCR in arterial wall tissue microdissected from infiltrated vessels, suggesting that the CD8+ T cells were targeting EBV antigens within the endothelium. Dutz et al. (2001) proposed that functional inactivation of the SH2D1A gene impairs the immunologic response to EBV, resulting in systemic vasculitis.
Verhelst et al. (2007) reported a boy with SAP deficiency who developed limbic encephalitis. He was diagnosed and treated for cervical B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma at age 9 years. At age 15, during hospitalization for pneumonia, blood tests revealed hypogammaglobulinemia for the first time. At age 16, he presented with seizures, decreased alertness, short-term memory loss, and hemiparesis. MRI and cerebral biopsy showed vasculitis with infiltration of T lymphocytes and granulomas. Despite aggressive treatment, he showed further deterioration and died 10 months later. There was absence of SAP protein on immunostaining of the patient's lymphocytes, but no mutation was identified in the SH2D1A gene. There was no family history of a similar disorder.
Booth et al. (2011) performed a retrospective analysis of 91 patients with genetically confirmed XLP1 ascertained worldwide, including 43 who had hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) and 48 without transplant. The most common presenting feature was hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH), which occurred in 39.6% of patients, and the most common overall feature was dysgammaglobulinemia, which occurred in 50% of patients at some point during the illness. Twenty-two patients had malignant lymphoproliferative disease, including 18 with B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Fifty-one (64.6%) of 79 patients tested were EBV-positive. There was no significant difference in mortality between those with and without documented EBV infection, but those with EBV infection had a higher frequency of HLH. The mortality for patients presenting with HLH was 65.6%, with a median age at presentation of 3 years, 2 months. Overall survival after transplant was 81.4%; however, survival fell to 50% in patients with HLH as a feature of disease. Untransplanted patients had an overall survival of 62.5% with the majority on immunoglobulin replacement therapy, but the outcome for those untransplanted after HLH was extremely poor, at only 18.8%. Overall, the study indicated that hematopoietic stem cell transplant should be undertaken in all XLP1 patients with HLH, because outcome without transplant is extremely poor, whereas the outcome of HSCT for other manifestations of XLP1 is very good.



PEX5
**Peroxisome biogenesis disorder 2A (Zellweger), 214110 (3), AR**
The peroxisome biogenesis disorder (PBD) Zellweger syndrome (ZS) is an autosomal recessive multiple congenital anomaly syndrome. Affected children present in the newborn period with profound hypotonia, seizures, and inability to feed. Characteristic craniofacial anomalies, eye abnormalities, neuronal migration defects, hepatomegaly, and chondrodysplasia punctata are present. Children with this condition do not show any significant development and usually die in the first year of life (summary by Steinberg et al., 2006).
For a complete phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Zellweger syndrome, see 214100.
Individuals with PBDs of complementation group 2 (CG2) have mutations in the PEX5 gene. For information on the history of PBD complementation groups, see 214100.
Thomas et al. (1975) described a male patient with hyperpipecolic acidemia. Features were persistent hepatomegaly, severe mental retardation, progressive loss of developmental milestones, and diminished visual acuity associated with nystagmus, abnormal discs, and retinal changes. He died at age 2 years following a progressive loss of neurologic function. Pipecolic acid was present in the serum at a concentration of 4 to 5 mg percent and trace amounts were detected in the urine. The complementation studies of Brul et al. (1988) assigned this patient to complementation group 2 (CG2).
**Peroxisome biogenesis disorder 2B, 202370 (3), AR**
The overlapping phenotypes of neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy (NALD) and infantile Refsum disease (IRD) represent the milder manifestations of the Zellweger syndrome spectrum (ZSS) of peroxisome biogenesis disorders. The clinical course of patients with the NALD and IRD presentation is variable and may include developmental delay, hypotonia, liver dysfunction, sensorineural hearing loss, retinal dystrophy, and visual impairment. Children with the NALD presentation may reach their teens, and those with the IRD presentation may reach adulthood (summary by Waterham and Ebberink, 2012).
For a complete phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of PBD(NALD/IRD), see 601539.
Individuals with mutations in the PEX5 gene have cells of complementation group 2 (CG2). For information on the history of PBD complementation groups, see 214100.
**Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata, type 5, 616716 (3), AR**
Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) is a peroxisomal disorder characterized by disproportionately short stature primarily affecting the proximal parts of the extremities, a typical facial appearance including a broad nasal bridge, epicanthus, high-arched palate, dysplastic external ears, and micrognathia, congenital contractures, characteristic ocular involvement, dwarfism, and severe mental retardation with spasticity. Biochemically, plasmalogen synthesis and phytanic acid alpha-oxidation are defective. Most patients die in the first decade of life (summary by Wanders and Waterham, 2005).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata, see 215100.
Baroy et al. (2015) described 3 Pakistani sibs and an unrelated Pakistani patient, all born of consanguineous parents, with RCDP5. The patients had a mild reduction in tissue plasmalogen level. Their clinical phenotype was analogous to other RCDP patients with mild biochemical defects who often have less pronounced skeletal abnormalities, later onset of epilepsy, and less profound growth delay and intellectual disability. The patients described by Baroy et al. (2015) reached more developmental milestones, such as self-feeding, independent ambulation, and limited receptive and expressive language skills, than do most patients with severely reduced plasmalogen levels. All 4 patients presented with congenital cataracts. Clinical and neurophysiologic studies in the 3 affected sibs indicated that they had demyelination peripheral neuropathy, which had not been reported in RCDP patients but is an important sign of adult Refsum disease (266500).



PDE4D
**Acrodysostosis 2, with or without hormone resistance, 614613 (3), AD**
Acrodysostosis-2 is a rare skeletal dysplasia characterized by brachydactyly, facial dysostosis, and spinal stenosis. Many patients have intellectual disability and some have hormone resistance (summary by Michot et al., 2012 and Lee et al., 2012).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of acrodysostosis, see ACRDYS1 (101800).
Michot et al. (2012) reported 4 unrelated patients, ranging in age from 3 to 7 years, with acrodysostosis-2. All had advanced bone age, facial dysostosis with nasal hypoplasia and depressed nasal bridge, severe brachydactyly with short metacarpals, metatarsals, and phalanges, and cone-shaped epiphyses. All also had intellectual disability with speech and psychomotor retardation. One had intrauterine growth retardation, but none had short stature. None had evidence of hormone resistance, except 1 who had increased parathyroid hormone (PTH). Two patients developed intracranial hypertension due to sinus thrombosis. Michot et al. (2012) also reported 5 patients with ACRDYS1. Comparison of the 2 groups revealed interesting genotype-phenotype correlations. Those with PRKAR1A mutations had hormone resistance, short stature, normal intellect, and no facial dysostosis, whereas those with PDE4D mutations had characteristic facial features, namely midface hypoplasia with the nasal hypoplasia, moderate intellectual disability with speech delay, and lack of hormone resistance in 3 of the 4.
Lee et al. (2012) reported 3 unrelated patients with ACRDYS2. All had small hands and midface hypoplasia, 2 had mild short stature, and 2 had lumbar stenosis. One had normal psychomotor development, 1 had significantly impaired development, and the third had mild developmental disability. One had congenital hypothyroidism, 1 had cryptorchidism, and 1 had no endocrine abnormalities. Two of the patients had previously been reported by Graham et al. (2001) (as case R1 and case 2, respectively). Additional features noted by Graham et al. (2001) included maxillonasal hypoplasia, brachydactyly, cone-shaped epiphyses, and intrauterine growth retardation. Lee et al. (2012) also identified 2 patients with ACRDYS1 due to mutations in the PRKAR1A gene. In a comparison of the phenotypes, Lee et al. (2012) concluded that it was difficult to distinguish the patients clinically. Both groups had mild short stature with brachydactyly, facial dysostosis, and spinal stenosis; both groups had variable endocrine abnormalities; and 4 of the 5 patients had some degree of developmental disability.
Lynch et al. (2013) reported 4 unrelated patients with sporadic ACRDYS2 and 1 family in which 3 sibs had the disorder. All patients had typical features, including round face, hypoplastic nares with upturned nose, and maxillary hypoplasia. In addition, several individuals had a flattened nasal bridge, hypertelorism, and epicanthal folds. Skeletal abnormalities included brachydactyly and shortening of the metacarpals and metatarsals with relative sparing of the first toe. None had evidence of decreased interpedicular distance. All had some degree of learning disability, developmental delay, and/or intellectual disability. Five patients had obesity, and 5 had eczema, chronic rhinitis, or asthma. Males tended to have cryptorchidism or hypospadias. Only 1 patient had short stature and only 1 had congenital hypothyroidism, suggesting that endocrine abnormalities are not common in this disorder. The father of the affected sibs showed subtle abnormalities, including brachydactyly and mild learning disability.
Lindstrand et al. (2014) reported 5 unrelated children with ACRDYS2. The patients had a typical phenotype, with nasal, midface, and maxillary hypoplasia, intellectual disability, and skeletal abnormalities. All patients were disproportionate with short extremities and brachydactyly; 2 had spinal stenosis. Four patients had red hair, and all had blue eyes, regardless of parental eye and hair color. Four had mild or transient parathyroid hormone resistance. One had cryptorchidism, 1 had type 1 diabetes and lack of pubertal growth spurt, and 1 had severe hypertension. The findings suggested that patients with ACRDYS2 also have endocrine abnormalities and should be followed for such.



LRBA
**Immunodeficiency, common variable, 8, with autoimmunity, 614700 (3), AR**
Common variable immunodeficiency-8 with autoimmunity is an autosomal recessive disorder of immune dysregulation. Affected individuals have early childhood onset of recurrent infections, particularly respiratory infections, and also develop variable autoimmune disorders, including idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and inflammatory bowel disease. The presentation and phenotype are highly variable, even within families (summary by Lopez-Herrera et al., 2012 and Alangari et al., 2012). Immunologic findings are also variable and may include decreased B cells, hypogammaglobulinemia, and deficiency of CD4+ T regulatory (Treg) cells (Charbonnier et al., 2015).
For a general description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of common variable immunodeficiency, see CVID1 (607594).
Lopez-Herrera et al. (2012) reported 5 patients from 4 unrelated consanguineous families with early-childhood onset of humoral immune deficiency and autoimmunity. In an Arabian family, 2 sibs presented in infancy with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) followed by recurrent respiratory infections or otitis media. They both developed chronic lung disease and bronchiectasis. One had early-onset asthma and steroid-responsive monoarthritis, whereas the other developed a cerebral mass suggestive of a granuloma. Both showed poor overall growth. Laboratory studies showed low immunoglobulin levels, consistent with a diagnosis of CVID. A Sicilian boy presented with recurrent warts and perineal molluscum contagiosum at age 12 years. He later developed recurrent severe respiratory infections with interstitial pneumonitis and bronchiectasis, ITP, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, atrophic gastritis due to autoantibodies against intrinsic factor, a submaxillary abscess, and colitis. Laboratory studies showed low IgG and complete IgA deficiency with normal neutrophil count. Hilar and mediastinal lymph node biopsies showed lymphoid follicular hyperplasia with the absence of the follicular mantle zone. He also developed a brain tumor of the right temporal lobe which was shown to be a granulomatous infiltration with T cells, plasma cells, and macrophages, but few B cells. An Iranian boy presented at age 2 years with recurrent respiratory infections, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and ITP. He developed finger clubbing due to chronic lung disease, hepatosplenomegaly, and failure to thrive. During 10 years' follow-up, he developed Crohn disease, cor pulmonale with right heart failure, and recurrent conjunctivitis. The fifth patient was an Iranian women who died at age 19 years after respiratory failure. She also had allergic dermatitis, recurrent diarrhea, recurrent upper respiratory infections, hypothyroidism, and myasthenia gravis. All homozygous individuals with LRBA deficiency showed reduced counts of switched-memory B cells, consistent with CVID. Two patients lacked marginal-zone-like B cells, and 1 had reduced counts of total B cells. Two patients had low natural killer (NK) cells, and 1 had low T-cell levels.
Alangari et al. (2012) reported 5 patients from 2 branches of a consanguineous Saudi family with an inherited disorder of immune dysregulation. One branch of the family contained 3 sisters ranging in age from 15 to 22 years. Two of the sisters presented in the first years of life with chronic nonbloody diarrhea, whereas the third presented with recurrent respiratory infections from age 4 years and developed diarrhea at age 18 years. Large-bowel biopsies of 2 patients showed mucosal inflammation and lymphocytic infiltration, and duodenal biopsy of 1 showed villous atrophy. One sister developed autoimmune thrombocytopenia and autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Two sisters had no history of recurrent infections. Immunologic workup showed low serum IgA and IgG with normal numbers of T and NK cells but markedly decreased T-cell proliferative responses. Two of the sisters had decreased numbers of B cells. The findings were consistent with a diagnosis of combined immunodeficiency. Two sibs from the other branch of the family presented with chronic diarrhea in childhood. Duodenal biopsies showed villous blunting and lymphocytic infiltration. One patient developed pancytopenia that responded to intravenous Ig and steroids; he also had Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-induced lymphoproliferative disease. Neither of these sibs had a history of recurrent infections, and immunologic workup showed normal Ig levels, normal B, T, and NK cells, normal T-cell proliferative responses, and normal antibody production in response to vaccination. However, Alangari et al. (2012) noted that the phenotype in these patients was consistent with immune dysregulation, and that the patients could develop more apparent immunologic abnormalities with age. The variability in the phenotype within this family was ascribed to other genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors.
Burns et al. (2012) reported a Pakistani girl, born of consanguineous parents, who presented at age 4 years with generalized lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and chronic diarrhea associated with autoimmune enteropathy. Initial immunologic workup showed increased serum IgG and low numbers of NK cells; T-cell number and function were normal. She showed growth defects and additional autoimmune features, and was treated with steroids and rituximab. Five years later, she developed severe recurrent infections and had new onset of an antibody deficiency with variable decreases in B cells. Exome sequencing identified a large homozygous deletion in the LRBA gene. Burns et al. (2012) noted that this disorder can present as an autoimmune syndrome with later development of a primary immunodeficiency.
Charbonnier et al. (2015) reported a boy, born of consanguineous Saudi parents, who presented in infancy with autoimmune enteropathy, type 1 diabetes mellitus, autoimmune hypothyroidism, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, and recurrent infections. Immunologic workup showed reduced T-cell proliferative responses, normal B-cell numbers, increased immunoglobulin levels, and increased autoantibodies. The phenotype was reminiscent of X-linked immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, and enteropathy (IPEX; 304790), but the patient did not carry mutations in the FOXP3 gene (300292). Whole-exome sequencing identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the LRBA gene (606453.0006). Charbonnier et al. (2015) also reported 2 sibs from a consanguineous Lebanese family who had childhood onset of recurrent infections, as well as variable features of immune dysregulation, including generalized lymphadenopathy, fibrosing pneumonitis with granulomas, hepatosplenomegaly, and pancytopenia. Laboratory investigations of these 3 patients and of the 3 sisters reported by Alangari et al. (2012) showed severe decreases in the number of CD4+ Treg cells, as well as decreases in several Treg cell markers, such as FOXP3, IL2RA (147730), and CTLA4 (123890). In vitro studies showed that patient Treg cells had impaired suppression of T-cell proliferation, with a skewing in favor of memory T cells and intense autoantibody production, as well as marked expansion of T follicular helper (T-FH) cells and contraction of T follicular regulatory (T-FR) cells. Patient Treg cells showed increased apoptosis and metabolic dysfunction.
Lo et al. (2015) identified 9 patients with LRBA deficiency. Most patients were diagnosed in early childhood with CVID, and all patients experienced substantial inflammatory and/or autoimmune complications. LRBA deficiency was associated with type 1 diabetes mellitus in 3 patients, Burkitt lymphoma in 1, and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in 1. Three patients experienced severe interstitial lung disease consisting of dense predominantly T-cell interstitial infiltrates that was refractory to multiple medications and led to progressive impairment of lung function. All patients had undergone corticosteroid therapy, and several had undergone various other immunosuppressive therapies prior to abatacept. Two underwent splenectomy.



TF
**Atransferrinemia, 209300 (3), AR**
Atransferrinemia is characterized by microcytic anemia and by iron loading. It can be treated effectively by plasma infusions (summary by Beutler et al., 2000).
Heilmeyer et al. (1961) described total absence of transferrin in a 7-year-old girl whose presenting complaint was severe hypochromic anemia. Death occurred from heart failure. Severe hemosiderosis of the heart and liver was found at autopsy. About half-normal levels of transferrin in both parents supported recessive inheritance (Goya et al., 1972).
Goya et al. (1972) described a patient with only a trace of transferrin in the blood by immunologic methods, who responded well to parenteral administration of transferrin. Hayashi et al. (1993) restudied the family reported by Goya et al. (1972). The proband showed late onset of anemia and growth retardation (at age 7 years) and was found to have a healthy brother and a sister with very low transferrin levels. Supplementary therapy with apo-TF over a period of 5 years resulted in gradual disappearance of the anemia and improvement in growth. Severe deficiency of both TF and haptoglobin were demonstrated by immunoelectrophoretic studies. Recovery from anemia and the resumption of growth were dependent, however, only on his TF level. Hayashi et al. (1993) suggested that TF values less than 10 mg/dl may result in severe growth retardation and anemia, whereas persons with more than 20 mg/dl are apparently healthy. They also suggested that coexisting haptoglobin deficiency may alleviate hemosiderosis. Study by isoelectric focusing disclosed that there was a small amount of TF variant present in all 3 sibs, and that the variant was produced by an allelic gene derived from their father. For that reason, Hayashi et al. (1993) suggested that the condition be termed hypotransferrinemia, that it is a recessive trait, and that subjects with the recessive phenotype may be compound heterozygotes of a 'variant' allele and a 'null' allele.
Westerhausen and Meuret (1977) observed an acquired (autoimmune) form of atransferrinemia.



CLDN14
**Deafness, autosomal recessive 29, 614035 (3), AR**
Wilcox et al. (2001) described 2 large consanguineous Pakistani families segregating profound congenital deafness.
Lee et al. (2012) reported 4 consanguineous Pakistani families in which multiple members had prelingual onset of nonsyndromic, nonprogressive severe to profound hearing loss affecting all frequencies, with greater loss in the high frequencies. The audiograms showed a downward slope.



MYO5B
**Microvillus inclusion disease, 251850 (3), AR**
Microvillus inclusion disease (MVID) is characterized by onset of intractable life-threatening watery diarrhea during infancy. Two forms are recognized: early-onset MVID with diarrhea beginning in the neonatal period, and late-onset, with first symptoms appearing after 3 or 4 months of life. Definite diagnosis is made by transmission electron microscopy demonstrating shortening or absence of apical microvilli with pathognomonic microvillus inclusions in mature enterocytes and peripheral accumulation of periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive granules or vesicles in immature enterocytes (Muller et al., 2008). The natural course of MVID is often fatal, but partial or total weaning from parenteral nutrition has been described.
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of diarrhea, see DIAR1 (214700).
Davidson et al. (1978) described a group of infants who presented with an apparently familial enteropathy characterized by protracted diarrhea from birth and hypoplastic villus atrophy. Electron microscopic examination of surface enterocytes in a jejunal biopsy specimen from 1 of the patients showed peculiar intracytoplasmic inclusions composed of neatly arranged brush-border microvilli. Similar intracytoplasmic inclusions were described in other infants who had protracted diarrhea starting at or soon after birth (Phillips et al., 1985).
Cutz et al. (1989) described the clinical and pathologic features of 9 cases. Three of the patients were from their original group of 5 patients reported by Davidson et al. (1978). Five were girls and four boys. Polyhydramnios was not observed in any of the patients, in contrast to congenital chloride diarrhea and diarrhea due to deficient sodium-hydrogen exchange, both of which are invariably associated with polyhydramnios. Three sets of sibs were represented among the 9 patients. In 2 families the parents were first cousins. One of the patients was still alive at 20 months; the other 8 had died at ages varying from 9 to 18 months. Cutz et al. (1989) concluded that this disorder may represent the most common cause of severe refractory diarrhea in the neonatal period. They suggested that microvillus inclusion disease may result from defective brush-border assembly and differentiation; it may represent an inborn error of intracellular transport, leading to aberrant assembly of the components of the enterocyte surface membrane. Rectal biopsy was proposed as a dependable and relatively easy method for early diagnosis.
From a review of 23 cases of microvillus atrophy collected from medical centers around the world, Phillips and Schmitz (1992) concluded that congenital and late-onset forms could be identified and that cases of late onset appeared to have a better prognosis. They concluded that the first morphologic abnormality to be detected in the intestinal epithelium was accumulation of 'secretory granules'; microvillus inclusions were seen in older cells in the upper villus region. Phillips and Schmitz (1992) suggested that a fundamental defect affects the intracellular traffic of certain cell components. Their patients included 8 boys and 15 girls from 22 families, one family having 2 affected sisters. One Caucasian parental couple out of 15 was consanguineous and 5 Arab couples out of 6 were consanguineous. In 20 families in which information was available, more than 1 child was affected in 5. In 4 additional families, sibs had died from intractable diarrhea in the first months of life. In all but 3 cases, diarrhea was the only symptom during the first days of life. Fifteen infants (75%) died between 3 and 9 months, mostly of dehydration, malnutrition, and sepsis. The oldest patient at the time of survey was 5 years old and growing normally. Aspirin in low dosage decreased stool output in this patient. All patients were receiving total parenteral nutrition (TPN). Three of the patients still alive at the time of survey had 'late-onset' diarrhea.
Fish and Molitoris (1994) discussed microvillus inclusion disease in connection with the role of changes in epithelial polarity in the pathogenesis of disease states. Likely possibilities for the mechanism of formation of these abnormal cytoplasmic vesicular bodies and apical surface membranes are centered around the abnormal delivery of Golgi-derived vesicles to the apical membrane. Processes mediated by both microtubules and actin microfilaments are involved in the delivery of vesicles to the apical region. Treatment of cultured fetal intestinal epithelium with microfilament-disrupting drugs resulted in the collapse of the apical membrane, with the formation of intracellular microvillus inclusion bodies (Carruthers et al., 1986).
In 4 patients from the Navajo reservation in northern Arizona, Pohl et al. (1999) observed microvillus inclusion disease with early onset. A fifth, unrelated affected Navajo child had been reported by Schofield et al. (1992).
Van der Velde et al. (2013) described their curated online international patient registry, which includes detailed information on patients with microvillus inclusion disease as well as identified MYO5B mutations.



C4B
**C4B deficiency, 614379 (3)**
Partial deficiency of C4 was found in 3 persons during a screening of 42,000 healthy Japanese (Torisu et al., 1970).
Of 26 patients with autoimmune chronic active hepatitis beginning in childhood, Vergani et al. (1985) found low C4 in 18 (69%) and low C3 serum levels in 5 (19%). Associated characteristics indicated a defect in synthesis of C4 and a genetic basis thereof was indicated by the fact that C4 phenotyping in 20 patients and in 26 parents showed that 90% and 81%, respectively, had null allotypes at either the C4A or C4B locus compared with 59% in controls.
Homozygous deficiency of C4A (614380) is associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (152700) and with type I diabetes mellitus; homozygous deficiency of C4B is associated with susceptibility to bacterial meningitis (Winkelstein, 1987).
In 3 African-American patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; 152700), Wilson and Perez (1988) found complete deficiency of plasma C4B.
Lhotta et al. (1990) stated that only 17 cases of complete deficiency of C4 had been described. They described a patient with complete deficiency and renal disease, first presenting as severe Henoch-Schonlein purpura with renal involvement at the age of 17. Six years later, he developed hypertension and nephrotic syndrome, requiring hemodialysis followed by cadaveric kidney graft. After 2 years of uncomplicated course, the patient suffered a recurrence of his primary disease in the grafted kidney.



EYA4
**?Cardiomyopathy, dilated, 1J, 605362 (3), AD**
Schonberger et al. (2000) described 2 kindreds with autosomal dominant transmission and age-related penetrance of both sensorineural hearing loss and dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) in the absence of other disorders. Moderate to severe hearing loss was evident by late adolescence, whereas ventricular dysfunction produced progressive congestive heart failure after the fourth decade.
**Deafness, autosomal dominant 10, 601316 (3), AD**
O'Neill et al. (1996) reported a large multigenerational family from the U.S. with progressive sensorineural hearing loss beginning in the second to fifth decades and leading ultimately to severe to profound hearing impairment requiring the use of amplification.
Verhoeven et al. (2000) reported a Belgian and a Norwegian family with nonsyndromic deafness similar to that in the American family reported by O'Neill et al. (1996). Hearing loss in all 3 families began with the middle frequencies and later involved the low and high frequencies.



C4A
**[Blood group, Rodgers], 614374 (3)**
The blood groups Chido (Ch) and Rodgers (Rg) are epitopes on the C4 protein, and polymorphisms associated with these epitopes may lead to the formation of antibodies to the Ch or Rg antigens in transfused patients. Identification of anti-Ch or anti-Rg is based on antibody neutralization with plasma from Ch-positive or Rg-positive individuals and lack of reactivity with qualified Ch-negative or Rg-negative red blood cells. The C4 protein occurs in 2 forms, C4A and C4B, which are encoded by 2 closely linked genes. C4A and C4B are expressed as single-chain precursors of 1,744 amino acids that are nearly identical, with amino acids differences at residues 1101 to 1106 distinguishing C4A from C4B. C4A and C4B are also distinguished by their expression of either the Ch antigen or the Rg antigen at residues 1188 to 1191, where the Ch1 epitope has ADLR and the Rg1 epitope has VDLL. C4A proteins usually carry the Rg antigens, and C4B proteins usually carry the Ch antigens, although in some haplotypes these associations are switched. Nine antigens have been described for the Ch/Rg system: 6 of high prevalence for Ch, 2 of high prevalence for Rg, and 1 of low prevalence, WH. Eight phenotypes of the Ch/Rg system have been established, with 88.2% of individuals having the Ch(1,2,3) Chido phenotype and 95.0% of individuals having the Rg(1,2) Rodgers phenotype (review by Mougey (2010)).
**C4a deficiency, 614380 (3), AR**
Partial deficiency of C4 was found in 3 persons during a screening of 42,000 healthy Japanese (Torisu et al., 1970).
Of 26 patients with autoimmune chronic active hepatitis beginning in childhood, Vergani et al. (1985) found low C4 in 18 (69%) and low C3 serum levels in 5 (19%). Associated characteristics indicated a defect in synthesis of C4 and a genetic basis thereof was indicated by the fact that C4 phenotyping in 20 patients and in 26 parents showed that 90% and 81%, respectively, had null allotypes at either the C4A or C4B (120820) locus compared with 59% in controls.
Homozygous deficiency of C4A is associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (152700) and with type I diabetes mellitus; homozygous deficiency of C4B is associated with susceptibility to bacterial meningitis (Winkelstein, 1987). Huang et al. (1995) found a strong association between C4A deletion and systemic lupus erythematosus in 14 multiplex SLE families.
Lhotta et al. (1990) stated that only 17 cases of complete deficiency of C4 had been described. They described a patient with complete deficiency and renal disease, first presenting as severe Henoch-Schonlein purpura with renal involvement at the age of 17. Six years later, he developed hypertension and nephrotic syndrome, requiring hemodialysis followed by cadaveric kidney graft. After 2 years of uncomplicated course, the patient suffered a recurrence of his primary disease in the grafted kidney.



SYN2
**{Schizophrenia, susceptibility to}, 181500 (3), AD**
Schizophrenia is a psychosis, a disorder of thought and sense of self. Although it affects emotions, it is distinguished from mood disorders in which such disturbances are primary. Similarly, there may be mild impairment of cognitive function, and it is distinguished from the dementias in which disturbed cognitive function is considered primary. There is no characteristic pathology, such as neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer disease (104300). Schizophrenia is a common disorder with a lifetime prevalence of approximately 1%. It is highly heritable but the genetics are complex. This may not be a single entity.
Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (see 125480) are generally considered to be separate entities, but patients who exhibit multiple symptoms of both disorders are often given the hybrid diagnosis schizoaffective disorder (Blacker and Tsuang, 1992).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Schizophrenia with or without an Affective Disorder
SCZD4 (600850) is associated with variation in the PRODH gene (606810); SCZD9 (604906) with variation in the DISC1 gene (605210); SCZD15 (613950) with variation in the SHANK3 gene (606230); SCZD16 (613959) with a chromosome duplication involving the VIPR2 gene (601970); SCZD17 (see 614332) with variation in the NRXN1 gene (600565); SCZD18 (615232) with variation in the SLC1A1 gene (133550); and SCZD19 (617629) with variation in the RBM12 gene (607179).
For associations pending confirmation, see MAPPING and MOLECULAR GENETICS.
Schizophrenia is characterized by a constellation of symptoms including hallucinations and delusions (psychotic symptoms) and symptoms such as severely inappropriate emotional responses, disordered thinking and concentration, erratic behavior, as well as social and occupational deterioration. It often develops in young adults who were previously normal (Andreasen, 1995).
In his first description of dementia praecox, Kraepelin identified subtypes of schizophrenia: hebephrenic, catatonic, and paranoid (Diefendorf, 1902). The utility and validity of these subtypes was long a subject of debate. Kendler et al. (1994) sought to clarify differences in outcome and familial psychopathology among these 3 subtypes in the Roscommon Family Study of severe mental illness conducted in a rural county in western Ireland. They found that the subtypes did not 'breed true' within families. They concluded that from a familial perspective the subtypes are not etiologically distinct syndromes.
Kendler and Hays (1982) compared a group of 30 patients with familial schizophrenia (defined as having an affected first-degree relative) and a group of 83 cases of sporadic schizophrenia. No difference in the intensity of (1) flattened, depressed, or elevated affect, (2) auditory hallucinations, or (3) delusions was found; however, more of the familial (56.7%) than of the sporadic (18.1%) schizophrenic patients had severe thought disorders. EEGs performed while the patients were taking neuroleptics showed abnormality in 72.3% of sporadic cases and 43.3% of familial cases.
Extrapyramidal signs such as bradykinesia, rigidity, or dyskinesias in patients with schizophrenia are usually attributed to antipsychotic drugs, many of which are dopamine-receptor antagonists. Chatterjee et al. (1995) prospectively studied 89 patients presenting with a first episode of schizophrenia who had never taken neuroleptic medications. Using the Simpson Dyskinesia Rating Scale, they found 16.9% (15) of these individuals to have significant extrapyramidal dysfunction on presentation. Twelve of the patients had akinesia, 6 had rigidity, 1 had cogwheeling, and 1 had mild spontaneous dyskinesia. These observations gave support to earlier proposals that the basal ganglia may be involved in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.
Kunugi et al. (1994) found no significant difference in head circumference at birth between 64 infants who later developed schizophrenia and 45 of their healthy sibs. Nopoulos et al. (1995) demonstrated decreased volume of the frontal lobe and increased volume of the intersulcal CSF in 12 males and 12 females presenting with a first episode of schizophrenia, compared to 24 controls matched for age, height, weight, parental social class, and paternal and maternal education.
Eye movement disturbances have been found in about 40 to 80% of patients with schizophrenia, about 25 to 40% of their healthy first-degree relatives, and in less than 10% of healthy control subjects (Holzman, 2000).
Schizophrenia and bipolar disorder (125480) are generally considered to be separate entities, but patients who exhibit multiple symptoms of both disorders are often given the hybrid diagnosis schizoaffective disorder (Blacker and Tsuang, 1992). The clinical features of such patients supported the argument that schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are variant expressions of a diathesis, in part because of the similar disease frequencies, ages at onset, and absence of sex bias in the 2 disorders.
Hallmayer et al. (2005) pointed out that Kraepelin (1909) viewed the disorder he termed dementia praecox as a cognitive disorder. Coining the term schizophrenia to replace dementia praecox, Bleuler (1920) emphasized that it 'is not a disease in the strict sense, but appears to be a group of diseases...Therefore we should speak of schizophrenias in the plural.' Hallmayer et al. (2005) stated that the inherent heterogeneity originally recognized has been obfuscated in modern diagnostic classifications, which are designed to meet the needs of patient management, not fundamental research, and which may not target phenotypes anchored in the biology of the illness. Limited understanding of phenotypic heterogeneity is a common challenge in genetic studies of complex disorders.



IFT80
**Short-rib thoracic dysplasia 2 with or without polydactyly, 611263 (3), AR**
Short-rib thoracic dysplasia (SRTD) with or without polydactyly refers to a group of autosomal recessive skeletal ciliopathies that are characterized by a constricted thoracic cage, short ribs, shortened tubular bones, and a 'trident' appearance of the acetabular roof. SRTD encompasses Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (EVC) and the disorders previously designated as Jeune syndrome or asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy (ATD), short rib-polydactyly syndrome (SRPS), and Mainzer-Saldino syndrome (MZSDS). Polydactyly is variably present, and there is phenotypic overlap in the various forms of SRTDs, which differ by visceral malformation and metaphyseal appearance. Nonskeletal involvement can include cleft lip/palate as well as anomalies of major organs such as the brain, eye, heart, kidneys, liver, pancreas, intestines, and genitalia. Some forms of SRTD are lethal in the neonatal period due to respiratory insufficiency secondary to a severely restricted thoracic cage, whereas others are compatible with life (summary by Huber and Cormier-Daire, 2012 and Schmidts et al., 2013).
There is phenotypic overlap with the cranioectodermal dysplasias (Sensenbrenner syndrome; see CED1, 218330).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of short-rib thoracic dysplasia, see SRTD1 (208500).
Beales et al. (2007) reported 3 consanguineous families with a form of asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy: 2 families were from Pakistan and 1 was from Turkey. The Turkish child had a narrow chest, short femora, and postaxial polydactyly on the hands and feet. One of the Pakistani families had 2 affected children. One child had short femora, narrow chest, and brachydactyly with broad hands and small feet. Skeletal survey showed trident acetabular roofs, mild bowing of the femurs, and small middle phalanges. The second child in this family had short femora, narrow chest, and rhizomelic limb shortening. Neither child had internal organ abnormalities or neonatal respiratory problems. The proband in the second Pakistani family was born stillborn at 20 weeks' gestation due to chorioamnionitis. Autoradiography showed mesomelic shortening of the lower limb with curved femora and trident acetabular roofs. There was no polydactyly, but the hands had short middle phalanges and metacarpals. There were no internal organ abnormalities.
Tuysuz et al. (2009) restudied the Turkish girl reported by Beales et al. (2007) and noted that she had atlantoaxial instability and spinal cord compression, features not previously reported in asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy.
Bizaoui et al. (2019) reported 4 fetuses from 2 unrelated families with a clinical diagnosis of Beemer-Langer syndrome (see SRTD12, 269860) and mutations in the IFT80 gene. Family 1 was a consanguineous Pakistani family in which the first pregnancy ended in early miscarriage. In the second pregnancy, prenatal ultrasound showed skeletal dysplasia with postaxial hexadactyly as well as hydrops fetalis, ascites, acrania, and omphalocele. Clinical examination after termination at 14 weeks' gestation showed features of SRPS, including narrow thorax, severe mesomicromelia with stubby hands, bilateral 2-3 toe syndactyly, absence of the cranial vault, mandibular hypoplasia, and cleft palate. The radiographs confirmed enlarged short ribs, short bowed tubular bones, squared scapulae, bilateral radial and fibular aplasia, slender proximal femurs, short tibias, trident configuration of the acetabular roof, and absent ossification of metacarpals and metatarsals. A third pregnancy showed recurrence of skeletal dysplasia, with short ribs, micromelia, and postaxial hexadactyly of all 4 limbs, and varus feet. Nonskeletal features included anencephaly with holoprosencephaly, absence of olfactory bulbs, high forehead, low-set ears, cleft lip and palate, short neck, and multicystic dysplastic kidneys. In family 2, the first pregnancy also ended in early miscarriage. The second pregnancy was terminated at 22 weeks' gestation due to skeletal and brain abnormalities seen on ultrasound screening. Fetal autopsy showed osteochondrodysplasia with narrow thorax, short limbs, postaxial hexadactyly of all extremities, and varus feet. Nonskeletal features included holoprosencephaly with hypoplastic frontal lobes, absence of olfactory bulbs, unfolded pinnae, cleft lip and palate, malformed lungs with only 2 lobes on the right and only 1 lobe on the left, and multilobar right kidney with multicystic left kidney. X-rays showed short ribs, platyspondyly, mesomelia of the 4 limbs with bowed tubular bones, hypoplastic non-ovoid tibiae longer than the fibulae, smooth metaphyses, and absent ossification of metatarsals. A third pregnancy was terminated at 12 weeks' gestation due to similar findings.



CASP8
**?Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, type IIB, 607271 (3), AR**
Caspase 8 deficiency is a syndrome of lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly, marginal elevation of 'double-negative T cells' (DNT; T-cell receptor alpha/beta+, CD4-/CD8-), defective FAS-induced apoptosis, and defective T-, B-, and natural killer (NK)-cell activation, with recurrent bacterial and viral infections (summary by Madkaikar et al., 2011).
Chun et al. (2002) reported 2 sibs, a 12-year-old female and an 11-year-old male, born of consanguineous parents, who presented with lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly associated with an immunodeficiency characterized by recurrent sinopulmonary and herpes simplex virus infections. Both sibs showed poor responses to immunization. The affected sibs had defects in activation of T lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, and natural killer cells, and defective CD95-mediated apoptosis. The unaffected mother, father, and sister were clinically well, although their peripheral blood lymphocytes showed partial defects in CD95-mediated apoptosis.
**{Breast cancer, protection against}, 114480 (3), AD, Somatic mutation**
Breast cancer (referring to mammary carcinoma, not mammary sarcoma) is histopathologically and almost certainly etiologically and genetically heterogeneous. Important genetic factors have been indicated by familial occurrence and bilateral involvement.
Cady (1970) described a family in which 3 sisters had bilateral breast cancer. Together with reports in the literature, this suggested to him the existence of families with a particular tendency to early-onset, bilateral breast cancer. The genetic basis might, of course, be multifactorial.
Anderson (1974) concluded that the sisters of women with breast cancer whose mothers also had breast cancer have a risk 47 to 51 times that in control women; a revised estimate was 39 times (Anderson, 1976). The disease in these women usually developed before menopause, was often bilateral, and seemed to be associated with ovarian function. About 30% of daughters with early-onset, bilateral breast cancer inherited the susceptibility. The risk of breast cancer to women with affected relatives is higher when the diagnosis is made at an early age and when the disease is bilateral. Ottman et al. (1983) provided tables that give the cumulative risk of breast cancer to mothers and sisters at various ages. The highest risk group is sisters of premenstrual probands with bilateral disease. Among the sisters of women with breast cancer, Anderson and Badzioch (1985) found the highest lifetime risks when the proband had bilateral disease, an affected mother (25 +/- 7.2%), or an affected sister (28 +/- 11%). The risks were reduced to 18 +/- 3.3% and 14 +/- 2.6%, respectively, with unilateral disease. An early example of familial breast cancer was provided by Broca (1866). According to the pedigree drawn by Lynch (1976), 10 women in 4 generations of the family of Broca's wife died of breast cancer. Eisinger et al. (1998) called attention to an even earlier report of hereditary breast cancer by Le Dran (1757), who related the experience of a colleague in Avignon who had diagnosed a 19-year-old nun with cancer of the right breast. The patient refused a mastectomy not only because of the pain of surgery, but also because of a belief that the operation would be futile. Her grandmother and a grandmaternal uncle died with breast cancer, and she was convinced that this malady was hereditary and that 'her blood was corrupted by a cancerous ferment natural to her family.'
Two families with an extraordinary incidence of male breast cancer and father-to-son transmission of same was reported by Everson et al. (1976). They found a suggestion of elevated urinary estrogen in 3 of the affected males. Teasdale et al. (1976) described breast cancer in 2 brothers and in a daughter of 1 brother. Kozak et al. (1986) reported breast cancer in 2 related males, an uncle and nephew. In this family and in several reported families with male breast cancer, Kozak et al. (1986) found women in the same family with breast cancer.
Soft tissue sarcomas are associated with breast cancer in Li-Fraumeni syndrome. Mulvihill (1982) used the term cancer family syndrome of Lynch (120435) for the association of colon and endometrial carcinoma and other neoplasms including breast cancer.
Seltzer et al. (1990) concluded that dermatoglyphics can help in the identification of women either with or at risk for breast cancer. They found that the presence of 6 or more whorls is associated in a statistically significant manner with breast cancer.
Marger et al. (1975) presented the cases of 2 brothers with breast cancer and reviewed the courses of 28 other previously unreported male patients. In one of the brothers, breast cancer was preceded by prostate cancer and estrogen administration, raising the possibility that the breast cancer was a metastatic deposit. The possibility of prostatic metastases was raised in 2 other patients. Demeter et al. (1990) reported breast cancer in a 64-year-old man who had had bilateral gynecomastia since childhood. His maternal grandfather had been found to have adenocarcinoma of the breast at the age of 65. His maternal grandmother had radical mastectomy for breast cancer at the age of 66 and 2 years later underwent radiation therapy for rib metastases. The proband's sister developed breast cancer at the age of 31 years and despite aggressive therapy died 1 year later with extensive metastases.
Hauser et al. (1992) reported a family in which 2 females and 2 males in 2 generations had breast cancer. Two females in the family had prophylactic bilateral mastectomy at a young age. One male developed a left breast mass and axillary node at age 59 and died of metastatic disease at age 62. His paternal uncle presented at age 57 years with bleeding from his right breast. Biopsy suggested Paget disease of the breast and he underwent mastectomy. He subsequently died at age 75 years of prostatic carcinoma. He had a daughter who developed breast cancer at age 27 years and died at age 30 with disseminated disease, and a son who developed infiltrating grade 4 adenocarcinoma of the breast at age 54.
**Hepatocellular carcinoma, somatic, 114550 (3)**
Hepatocellular carcinoma is the major histologic type of malignant primary liver neoplasm. It is the fifth most common cancer and the third most common cause of death from cancer worldwide. The major risk factors for HCC are chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, prolonged dietary aflatoxin exposure, alcoholic cirrhosis, and cirrhosis due to other causes. Hepatoblastomas comprise 1 to 2% of all malignant neoplasms of childhood, most often occurring in children under 3 years of age. Hepatoblastomas are thought to be derived from undifferentiated hepatocytes (Taniguchi et al., 2002).
Primary cancer of the liver in 3 brothers was described by Kaplan and Cole (1965) and by Hagstrom and Baker (1968). In these patients there was no recognized preexisting liver disease. Denison et al. (1971) described 2 adult brothers who died of primary hepatocellular carcinoma. Both had micronodular cirrhosis with features of subacute progressive viral hepatitis. Australia antigen was demonstrated in the brother in whom it was sought. Their father had died much earlier of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatoblastoma has been described in sibs (Fraumeni et al., 1969; Napoli and Campbell, 1977; Ito et al., 1987).
See 231100 for description of liver cancer as a complication of giant cell hepatitis of infancy. Familial liver cell carcinoma might also have its explanation in alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (613490), hemochromatosis (235200), and tyrosinemia (276700).
Jiang et al. (2019) used proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling to characterize 110 paired tumor and nontumor tissues of clinical early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma related to hepatitis B virus infection. The quantitative proteomic data highlight heterogeneity in early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma. The cohort was stratified into subtypes S-I, S-II, and S-III, each of which has a different clinical outcome. S-III, which is characterized by disrupted cholesterol homeostasis, is associated with the lowest overall rate of survival and the greatest risk of a poor prognosis after first-line surgery.
**{Lung cancer, protection against}, 211980 (3), AD, Somatic mutation**
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in the U.S. and worldwide. The 2 major forms of lung cancer are nonsmall cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer (see 182280), which account for 85% and 15% of all lung cancers, respectively. Nonsmall cell lung cancer can be divided into 3 major histologic subtypes: squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and large cell lung cancer. Cigarette smoking causes all types of lung cancer, but it is most strongly linked with small cell lung cancer and squamous cell carcinoma. Adenocarcinoma is the most common type in patients who have never smoked. Nonsmall cell lung cancer is often diagnosed at an advanced stage and has a poor prognosis (summary by Herbst et al., 2008).
Joishy et al. (1977) described identical twins who developed symptoms of alveolar cell carcinoma almost simultaneously.
Ahrendt et al. (2001) noted that incidence rates for squamous cell and small cell lung carcinoma began falling among males in the mid-1980s, but a decline in the incidence of primary adenocarcinoma of the lung among males was not observed until 5 to 10 years later. Similarly, although the incidence rates of squamous cell, large cell, and small cell lung carcinoma among women leveled off or started to decrease, the incidence of adenocarcinoma continued to increase. With these changes in the incidence among the different histologic types of lung carcinoma over the 1990s, adenocarcinoma of the lung became the most common type of lung carcinoma in the U.S. (Wingo et al., 1999).



JPH2
**Cardiomyopathy, hypertrophic, 17, 613873 (3), AD**
Matsushita et al. (2007) studied 4 Japanese probands with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH). The first proband was diagnosed at 14 years of age and had anterolateral hypertrophy of the free left ventricular wall. His mother, who was diagnosed at 40 years of age, had left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) on electrocardiogram (ECG) and a sigmoid septum with hyperdynamic LV motion on echocardiography. A younger sister had died suddenly at 3 years of age. The second proband was diagnosed with CMH at 33 years of age, and had a family history of CMH involving her grandfather, father, and the father's sibs, who were unavailable for study. The third proband was diagnosed with CMH at 7 months of age and had hypertrophy of the interventricular septum and posterior wall of the left ventricle (both 15 mm to 16 mm in thickness) and left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. The fourth proband was diagnosed at 35 years of age, and had negative T wave, abnormal Q wave, and nonsustained ventricular tachycardia on ECG. Echocardiography showed interventricular septal hypertrophy of the left ventricle and paradoxical flow; MRI revealed an aneurysm of the left ventricular apex. Myocardial biopsy showed myocyte hypertrophy and disarray and myocardial fibrosis, consistent with a diagnosis of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.



PADI4
**{Rheumatoid arthritis, susceptibility to}, 180300 (3)**
Rheumatoid arthritis is an inflammatory disease, primarily of the joints, with autoimmune features and a complex genetic component.



NPM1
**Leukemia, acute myeloid, somatic, 601626 (3)**
Shields et al. (2003) published a case report on acute myeloid leukemia that presented as bilateral orbital myeloid sarcoma (or chloroma) in a previously healthy 25-month-old boy. Bone marrow biopsy revealed blasts and cells with maturing monocytic features. A final diagnosis of M5b AML was made. The authors reviewed the literature and concluded that leukemia may be the most likely diagnosis in a child with bilateral soft tissue orbital tumors.



SLC30A8
**{Diabetes mellitus, noninsulin-dependent, susceptibility to}, 125853 (3), AD**
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is distinct from maturity-onset diabetes of the young (see 606391) in that it is polygenic, characterized by gene-gene and gene-environment interactions with onset in adulthood, usually at age 40 to 60 but occasionally in adolescence if a person is obese. The pedigrees are rarely multigenerational. The penetrance is variable, possibly 10 to 40% (Fajans et al., 2001). Persons with type 2 diabetes usually have an obese body habitus and manifestations of the so-called metabolic syndrome (see 605552), which is characterized by diabetes, insulin resistance, hypertension, and hypertriglyceridemia.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Susceptibility to Type 2 Diabetes
Susceptibility to T2D1 (601283) is conferred by variation in the calpain-10 gene (CAPN10; 605286) on chomosome 2q37. The T2D2 locus (601407) on chromosome 12q was found in a Finnish population. The T2D3 locus (603694) maps to chomosome 20. The T2D4 locus (608036) maps to chromosome 5q34-q35. Susceptibility to T2D5 (616087) is conferred by variation in the TBC1D4 gene (612465) on chromosome 13q22.
A mutation has been observed in hepatocyte nuclear factor-4-alpha (HNF4A; 600281.0004) in a French family with NIDDM of late onset. Mutations in the NEUROD1 gene (601724) on chromosome 2q32 were found to cause type II diabetes mellitus in 2 families. Mutation in the GLUT2 glucose transporter was associated with NIDDM in 1 patient (138160.0001). Mutation in the MAPK8IP1 gene, which encodes the islet-brain-1 protein, was found in a family with type II diabetes in individuals in 4 successive generations (604641.0001). Polymorphism in the KCNJ11 gene (600937.0014) confers susceptibility. In French white families, Vionnet et al. (2000) found evidence for a susceptibility locus for type II diabetes on 3q27-qter. They confirmed the diabetes susceptibility locus on 1q21-q24 reported by Elbein et al. (1999) in whites and by Hanson et al. (1998) in Pima Indians. A mutation in the GPD2 gene (138430.0001) on chromosome 2q24.1, encoding mitochondrial glycerophosphate dehydrogenase, was found in a patient with type II diabetes mellitus and in his glucose-intolerant half sister. Mutations in the PAX4 gene (167413) have been identified in patients with type II diabetes. Triggs-Raine et al. (2002) stated that in the Oji-Cree, a gly319-to-ser change in HNF1-alpha (142410.0008) behaves as a susceptibility allele for type II diabetes. Mutation in the HNF1B gene (189907.0007) was found in 2 Japanese patients with typical late-onset type II diabetes. Mutations in the IRS1 gene (147545) have been found in patients with type II diabetes. A missense mutation in the AKT2 gene (164731.0001) caused autosomal dominant type II diabetes in 1 family. A (single-nucleotide polymorphism) SNP in the 3-prime untranslated region of the resistin gene (605565.0001) was associated with susceptibility to diabetes and to insulin resistance-related hypertension in Chinese subjects. Susceptibility to insulin resistance has been associated with polymorphism in the TCF1 (142410.0011), PPP1R3A (600917.0001), PTPN1 (176885.0001), ENPP1 (173335.0006), IRS1 (147545.0002), and EPHX2 (132811.0001) genes. The K121Q polymorphism of ENPP1 (173335.0006) is associated with susceptibility to type II diabetes; a haplotype defined by 3 SNPs of this gene, including K121Q, is associated with obesity, glucose intolerance, and type II diabetes. A SNP in the promoter region of the hepatic lipase gene (151670.0004) predicts conversion from impaired glucose tolerance to type II diabetes. Variants of transcription factor 7-like-2 (TCF7L2; 602228.0001), located on 10q, have also been found to confer risk of type II diabetes. A common sequence variant, rs10811661, on chromosome 9p21 near the CDKN2A (600160) and CDKN2B (600431) genes has been associated with risk of type II diabetes. Variation in the PPARG gene (601487) has been associated with risk of type 2 diabetes. A promoter polymorphism in the IL6 gene (147620) is associated with susceptibility to NIDDM. Variation in the KCNJ15 gene (602106) has been associated with T2DM in lean Asians. Variation in the SLC30A8 gene (611145) has been associated with susceptibility to T2D. Variation in the HMGA1 gene (600701.0001) is associated with an increased risk of type II diabetes. Mutation in the MTNR1B gene (600804) is associated with susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.
Protection Against Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
Protein-truncating variants in the SLC30A8 (611145) have been associated with a reduced risk for T2D.



ANLN
**Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 8, 616032 (3), AD**
Gbadegesin et al. (2014) reported 2 unrelated families with proteinuria due to focal segmental glomerulosclerosis confirmed by renal biopsy. Some clinical details of 1 large 4-generation family were provided. The age at onset varied greatly, between 9 and 69 years, and end-stage renal disease occurred between 35 and 75 years. Five patients underwent renal transplant with no recurrence in the renal allograft.



MAD1L1
**Prostate cancer, somatic, 176807 (3)**
The aggressiveness of prostate cancer varies widely. Some tumors progress to invasive, potentially life-threatening disease, whereas others stay latent for the remainder of an individual's lifetime.





OPTN
**Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 12, 613435 (3)**
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-12 with or without frontotemporal dementia (ALS12) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by onset of ALS in adulthood. Rare patients may also develop frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive inheritance patterns have been reported; there is also sporadic occurrence (summary by Maruyama et al., 2010 and Feng et al., 2019).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, see ALS1 (105400).
Of 6 Japanese individuals from consanguineous marriages who had ALS, Maruyama et al. (2010) identified 3 with mutations in the OPTN gene. Two were sibs. One member of the sib pair developed muscle weakness of her left arm at 33 years of age that progressed to dysphagia requiring endotracheal intubation. She was bedridden by age 34 and died at age 57. Her brother also had onset with left arm weakness at 36 years of age and 1 year later developed dysphagia, dysarthria, and tongue fasciculations. He likewise required endotracheal intubation, was bedridden by age 37, and died at the age of 55. The third patient from a consanguineous family developed dysarthria at 52 years of age and had muscle weakness of her left upper and lower extremities starting at 54 years of age. Her deep tendon reflex was exaggerated, but there was no pathologic reflex. She was still breathing independently at 60 years of age. These 3 individuals were homozygous for mutation in OPTN; 4 other heterozygous individuals identified in a separate analysis had onset in their 50s with slow progression. All individuals with mutations of OPTN showed onset from 30 to 60 years of age. Most of them showed a relatively slow progression and long duration before respiratory failure, although the clinical phenotypes were not homogeneous.
Feng et al. (2019) reported a Chinese woman who presented at 38 years of age with dysarthria, language difficulties, emotional lability, memory impairment, and executive dysfunction. PET scan imaging showed hypometabolic changes in several brain regions, including the frontotemporal lobes, consistent with FTD. Soon after, she developed features of ALS, including limb weakness and atrophy, tongue fasciculations, hyperactive reflexes with Babinski sign, and neurogenic changes on EMG. The disorder was rapidly progressive and she died of respiratory failure 18 months after disease onset. Neuropathologic studies were not reported. There was no family history of a similar disorder. The authors noted that the phenotypic spectrum of ALS12 may be broader and include FTD.
**Glaucoma 1, open angle, E, 137760 (3), AD**
Quigley (1993) reviewed adult-onset primary open angle glaucoma, which combines a particular abnormal appearance of the optic disc (optic nerve head) with a slowly progressive loss of visual sensitivity. Many patients with glaucoma have intraocular pressures above the normal range, although this cannot be considered part of the definition of the disease, since some patients have normal intraocular pressures. Changes in the optic disc, either inherited or acquired, contribute to the development of the disorder, which leads to visual loss from increasing nerve fiber layer atrophy. Quigley et al. (1994) stated that POAG should be reviewed as a multifactorial disorder.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Primary Open Angle Glaucoma
Other forms of primary open angle glaucoma include GLC1A (137750), caused by mutation in the MYOC gene (601652) on chromosome 1q24; GLC1B (606689) on chromosome 2cen-q13; GLC1C (601682) on chromosome 3q21-q24; GLC1D (602429) on chromosome 8q23; GLC1F (603383), caused by mutation in the ASB10 gene on chromosome 7q36; GLC1G (609887), caused by mutation in the WDR36 gene (609669) on chromosome 5q22; GLC1H (611276) on chromosome 2p16-p15; GLC1I (609745) on chromosome 15q11-q13; GLC1J (608695) on chromosome 9q22; GLC1K (608696) on chromosome 20p12; GLC1L (see 137750) on chromosome 3p22-p21; GLC1M (610535) on chromosome 5q22; GLC1N (611274) on chromosome 15q22-q24; GLC1O (613100), caused by mutation in the NTF4 gene (162662) on chromosome 19q13; GLC1P (177700), caused by an approximately 300-kb duplication on chromosome 12q24, most likely involving the TBK1 gene (604834).
Nail-patella syndrome (NPS; 161200), which is caused by mutation in the LMX1B gene (602575) on chromosome 9q34, has open angle glaucoma as a pleiotropic feature.
Other Forms of Glaucoma
For a general description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of congenital forms of glaucoma, see GLC3A (231300).
See 606657 for a discussion of normal tension glaucoma (NTG) or normal pressure glaucoma (NPG), a subtype of POAG.
See 618880 for a discussion of primary closed-angle glaucoma.
Tanito et al. (2004) described the use of a digitized laser slit lamp that uses a helium-neon laser as a light source in detecting reduction of posterior pole retinal thickness in glaucoma. Posterior pole retinal thickness was found to be decreased in early and moderate stage POAG. Reduction of perifoveal retinal thickness was correlated with visual field loss.
In a study of 4,319 subjects in the Beijing Eye Study stratified into several myopia subgroups, Xu et al. (2007) found that marked to high myopia with a myopic refractive error exceeding -6 diopters was associated with a high prevalence of glaucomatous optic neuropathy.
**{Glaucoma, normal tension, susceptibility to}, 606657 (3)**
Glaucoma is the second most common cause of blindness worldwide (Thylefors et al., 1995; Quigley, 1996). It is characterized by progressive loss of optic nerve axons and visual field damage. Most glaucoma in Caucasian and African American populations is of the primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) type (see 137760), in which elevated intraocular pressure (IOP) is a major feature (Sommer et al., 1991). Normal tension glaucoma (NTG) is an important subtype of POAG, in which the IOP is consistently within the statistically normal population range. NTG accounts for approximately one-third of all POAG cases (Bonomi et al., 1998). Because the IOP is normal when measured and patients often have good central vision, NTG is underdiagnosed and the condition presents late.



LRMDA
**Albinism, oculocutaneous, type VII, 615179 (3), AR**
Gronskov et al. (2013) studied individuals with oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) due to mutations in the C10ORF11 gene (see MOLECULAR GENETICS). The authors stated that most of the affected individuals had a light complexion with a tendency to lighter pigmentation than that of their relatives; eye symptoms predominated, with nystagmus and iris transillumination present in all patients. Extremely sparse pigmentation of the peripheral ocular fundus was seen. Visual evoked potentials showed crossed asymmetry of the cortical visual response (misrouting) in all tested individuals. Photophobia was not a major problem. Hair color varied from pale blond to dark brown.



FLI1
**Bleeding disorder, platelet-type, 21, 617443 (3), AR, AD**
BDPLT21 is a hematologic disorder characterized by increased risk of bleeding resulting from a functional platelet defect. Platelets have decreased or even absent dense bodies and abnormally enlarged and fused alpha-granules, and they show defective secretion and aggregation responses to agonists. Platelets are usually enlarged, and some patients may have mild to moderate thrombocytopenia (summary by Saultier et al., 2017).
Stockley et al. (2013) reported 7 patients from 3 unrelated families with BDPLT21. All patients had excessive bleeding associated with a significant reduction in platelet ATP secretion in response to all agonists tested, consistent with a defect in dense granule secretion. Three of the patients had mild thrombocytopenia. In 2 families, the platelet defect was associated with alopecia, eczema and/or psoriasis, and recurrent viral infections.
Saultier et al. (2017) reported a father and son and an unrelated woman with BDPLT21 manifest as congenital macrothrombocytopenia. The father and son had not experienced significant bleeding episodes, whereas the 52-year-old woman had a history of excessive bleeding, predominantly gynecologic and obstetric, and involving the oral cavity. Patient platelets contained enlarged fused alpha-granules and almost complete absence of dense granules. Cultured patient-derived megakaryocytes were smaller and formed very few proplatelets compared to controls; patient megakaryocytes also had a lower percentage of mature markers compared to controls, suggesting impaired megakaryocyte differentiation. A small number (7-9%) of platelets from 2 patients showed glycogen-containing vacuoles, and a smaller number (3%) of platelets from 1 patient showed autophagosomes. The overall findings suggested a defect in vesicle biogenesis or trafficking.
Autosomal Recessive BDPLT21
Stevenson et al. (2015) reported 2 adult sibs, born of consanguineous Caucasian parents, with a lifelong bleeding disorder characterized by moderate to severe mucosal bleeding and menorrhagia associated with thrombocytopenia and enlarged platelets. Patient platelets showed reduced aggregation in response to ADP and collagen, but normal response to arachidonic acid and ristocetin. Platelet electron microscopy showed some platelets with large, fused, and electron-dense alpha-granules characteristic of the defects observed in Paris-Trousseau thrombocytopenia. There were no other clinical features associated with Paris-Trousseau syndrome or Jacobsen Syndrome. The parents were unaffected.



H19
**Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, 130650 (3), AD**
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome is a pediatric overgrowth disorder involving a predisposition to tumor development. The clinical presentation is highly variable; some cases lack the hallmark features of exomphalos, macroglossia, and gigantism as originally described by Beckwith (1969) and Wiedemann (1969) (summary by Weksberg et al., 2010).
Mussa et al. (2016) provided a review of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, including the wide spectrum of phenotypic manifestations, delineation of the frequencies of manifestations according to genotype, and discussion of the molecular and epigenetic defects that underlie the disorder.
Individuals with BWS may grow at an increased rate during the latter half of pregnancy and in the first few years of life, but adult heights are generally in the normal range. Abnormal growth may also manifest as hemihypertrophy and/or macroglossia. Hypoglycemia is reported in 30 to 50% of babies with BWS. There is an increased frequency of malformations and medical complications, including abdominal wall defects (omphalocele, umbilical hernia, and diastasis recti) and visceromegaly involving liver, spleen, pancreas, kidneys, or adrenals. Fetal adrenocortical cytomegaly is a pathognomonic finding. Renal anomalies may include primary malformations, renal medullary dysplasia, nephrocalcinosis, and nephrolithiasis. There is a predisposition to embryonal malignancies, with Wilms tumor and hepatoblastoma the most common (review by Weksberg et al., 2010).
Irving (1967, 1970) initially described the 'typical linear indentations of the lobe' that have become one of the diagnostic criteria, also well documented by Best and Hoekstra (1981). Peculiar posterior helical ear pits were first described in the BWS by Kosseff et al. (1972) and later by many others (see Best, 1991).
Two reported patients had hearing loss due to fixation of the stapes (Paulsen, 1973 and Daugbjerg and Everberg, 1984). In 3 patients, BWS and type III polycystic kidney disease occurred simultaneously (Mulvihill et al., 1989). An adult woman developed a progressive virilization due to her androgen-secreting adrenal carcinoma (Clouston et al., 1989).
A review of 31 patients with BWS and malignant tumors showed that 18 had Wilms tumor (Sotelo-Avila et al., 1980). Wiedemann (1983) reported that of 388 children, 29 developed 32 neoplasms. Of these tumors, 26 were intraabdominal, 14 being Wilms tumors and 5 adrenocortical carcinoma. Hemihypertrophy, partial or complete, was noted in 12.5% of the cases but in more than 49% of the children with neoplasms.
Wiedemann (1989) commented on overgrowth of the external genitalia in both males and females with BWS. Sippell et al. (1989) reported longitudinal data on height, bone maturation, weight, and pubertal development in 7 children with BWS. The children reached an average height of 2.5 SD above the mean at or after puberty. Growth velocity was above the ninetieth percentile until 4 to 6 years of age, and normal thereafter. Bone age was significantly advanced in all patients studied. One of the patients had latent hypothyroidism. The association of BWS and thyroid disorders may be more than coincidental (Leung, 1985 and Leung and McArthur, 1989). Emery et al. (1983) reported 2 affected sibs, one with thoracic neuroblastoma and the other who died at age 2 months of cardiomyopathy and respiratory failure.
A 'new' aspect of the natural history of BWS was reported by Chitayat et al. (1990) who observed 2 infants who were apparently normal at birth but later developed characteristics of the disorder. Both had hypoglycemia neonatally and gradually developed coarse facial changes, umbilical hernia, and macroglossia. Renal sonography done after the macroglossia developed showed large kidneys in both. The placenta was carefully examined in each case but findings described as typical of BWS were found only in one. Chitayat et al. (1990) postulated that the cellular hyperplasia and hypertrophy characteristic of BWS is caused by persistent rests of embryonal cells that secrete paracrine and/or endocrine growth factors and that the effects may not become evident until postnatal life. Neuroblastoma is another form of embryonal neoplasm that occurs in BWS (Chitayat et al., 1990). Falik-Borenstein et al. (1991) described an affected infant with congenital gastric teratoma.
In a study of 53 affected children, Carlin et al. (1990) suggested that this disorder may be milder in many cases than one would guess from published descriptions. In 11 families (21%), more than one child had BWS, including 2 sets of twins, one monozygotic and one dizygotic. Additionally, 24 families had one or sometimes both parents, and/or other relatives, affected with one or more signs of BWS. They suggested that hemihypertrophy is an underappreciated diagnostic clue for BWS in the relatives of probands. Knight et al. (1980) and Watanabe and Yamanaka (1990) described prune belly syndrome (100100) in association with BWS.
Mental retardation was documented in 6 of 39 cases observed by Martinez-y-Martinez et al. (1992), one being related to neonatal hypoglycemia.
Elliott et al. (1994) observed 76 patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome. The criteria for diagnosis were the presence of 3 major findings (macroglossia, pre- or postnatal growth greater than the 90th centile, and abdominal wall defects) or 2 major findings plus minor manifestations. In this preselected group, macroglossia was found in 97% of the patients, overgrowth in 88%, and abdominal wall defects in 80%. Hypoglycemia occurred in 48 patients and neoplasias in 3. Intellectual development was normal in all. Congenital heart defects were reported in 5 patients. Three patients had postaxial polydactyly of the foot. In one family, the mother of the index case had an ear pit and macroglossia as a child. In one family, 2 first cousins were affected. In 2 other families, 2 sibs were affected. Of 68 apparently sporadic cases, 15 had a relative with minor features of the syndrome. Elliott et al. (1994) suggested that incomplete penetrance may lead to underdiagnosis of familial cases.
Weng et al. (1995) reported the results of a follow-up study on 15 patients with WBS. They found that the pregnancies in these cases tended to have polyhydramnios with large placentas that were almost twice the normal placental weight. The large fetal size and polyhydramnios often resulted in early delivery with occasional perinatal mortality (observed in 3 cases). Excessive umbilical cord length was a manifestation of the increased placental size and was a useful sign in suspecting WBS before delivery. Abdominal wall defects and/or macroglossia helped confirm the diagnosis at birth. The newborn patients were almost 2 standard deviations above the expected mean length and weight for gestational age. The trend to increased size continued through early childhood and became less dramatic with increasing age. No cytogenetic abnormality was detected in 9 patients studied and the only tumor detected was a gastric teratoma evident in one infant at birth. Four of 15 patients had surgery for macroglossia. The findings were compared with those of Pettenati et al. (1986), who studied 22 patients.
Drut and Drut (1996) studied affected members of a family in which 4 members had WBS as a result of trisomy 11p15. Clinical examination showed nonimmune hydrops and placentomegaly in 2 sibs and multiple phenotypic abnormalities consistent with WBS in the 2 other relatives.
Moore et al. (2000) performed craniofacial anthropometric analyses on 19 patients with BWS and their relatives. The authors concluded that a unique, though variable, pattern of facial morphology can be defined in this syndrome, and that this phenotype does not diminish with age.
Everman et al. (2000) conducted a retrospective study that compared the serial alpha-fetoprotein (AFP; 104150) concentrations from 22 children with BWS with levels established for healthy children. The AFP concentration was greater with BWS and declined during the postnatal period at a significantly slower rate than what had been reported in healthy children. AFP levels obtained in the course of routine tumor screening in children with BWS should be interpreted with a normal curve established specifically for BWS rather than with previously published data for healthy infants and children.
Reddy et al. (1972) described a cardiac hamartoma in a 2-year-old child with BWS. Williams et al. (1990) found hamartoma of the urinary bladder in an infant with BWS. Jonas and Kimonis (2001) described a girl with a left chest wall hamartoma, macroglossia, nevus flammeus of the middle forehead, and a small umbilical hernia who developed left lower limb hemihypertrophy by 1 year of age and was presumed to have BWS.
Poole et al. (2012) reported 2 brothers with classic BWS. Both had very high birth weight (greater than 99th percentile), macroglossia requiring surgical correction, undescended testes, diastasis recti, and neonatal hypoglycemia. The older brother had large kidneys with unilateral cysts, a minor right-sided ear anomaly, and attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder. At age 24 years, he had a large head, prominent supraorbital ridges, a large mouth, and large hands and feet. The younger brother had mild right-sided hemihypertrophy and generalized joint hypermobility. He developed a Wilms tumor and needed special education. Puberty was delayed.
**Silver-Russell syndrome, 180860 (3), AD**
Silver-Russell syndrome-1 (SRS1) is a clinically heterogeneous condition characterized by severe intrauterine growth retardation, poor postnatal growth, craniofacial features such as a triangular shaped face and a broad forehead, body asymmetry, and a variety of minor malformations. The phenotypic expression changes during childhood and adolescence, with the facial features and asymmetry usually becoming more subtle with age. Hypomethylation at distal chromosome 11p15 (ICR1) represents a major cause of the disorder. Opposite epimutations, namely hypermethylation at the same region on 11p15, are observed in about 5 to 10% of patients with Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS; 130650), an overgrowth syndrome (Bartholdi et al., 2009).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Silver-Russell Syndrome
SRS2 (618905) is caused by maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 7. SRS3 (616489) is caused by mutation in the IGF2 gene (147470) on chromosome 11p15. SRS4 (618907) is caused by mutation in the PLAG1 gene (603026) on chromosome 8q12. SRS5 (618908) is caused by mutation in the HMGA2 gene (600698) on chromosome 12q14.
Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) was reported independently by Silver et al. (1953) and Russell (1954). Silver et al. (1953) described 2 unrelated children with congenital hemihypertrophy, low birth weight, short stature, and elevated urinary gonadotropins. Russell (1954) described 5 unrelated children with intrauterine growth retardation and characteristic facial features, including triangular shaped face with a broad forehead and pointed, small chin with a wide, thin mouth. Two children had body asymmetry. Although each of these authors emphasized different phenotypic features, the whole picture was later identified as the 'Russell-Silver syndrome' (Patton, 1988).
Chitayat et al. (1988) described hepatocellular carcinoma in a 4-year-old boy with Russell-Silver syndrome. His brother had low birth weight and bilateral clinodactyly of the fifth fingers and grew slowly. Neither brother showed asymmetry. Donnai et al. (1989) described unusually severe Silver-Russell syndrome in 3 children with pre- and postnatal growth deficiency.
Price et al. (1999) reevaluated 57 patients in whom the diagnosis of SRS had been considered definite or likely. In 50 patients the clinical findings complied with a very broad definition of SRS. Notable additional findings included generalized camptodactyly in 11 individuals, many with distal arthrogryposis. Thirteen of the 25 males studied required genital surgery for conditions including hypospadias and inguinal hernia. Severe feeding problems were reported by 56% of parents, and sweating and pallor were described by 52% of parents in the early weeks of life. Fourteen of the 38 individuals of school age had been considered for special education; 4 attended special school. Molecular analysis in 42 subjects identified uniparental disomy (UPD) of chromosome 7 in 4 subjects. The phenotype in these 4 cases was generally milder than that in the non-UPD cases, with only 2 having the classic facial dysmorphism.
Anderson et al. (2002) conducted a study of gastrointestinal complications of SRS by questionnaire distributed by MAGIC, a support group for individuals with SRS. One-hundred thirty-five completed surveys were returned, of which 65 related to children with clear-cut SRS. Of these, 50 (77%) had gastrointestinal symptoms: gastroesophageal reflux disease (34%), esophagitis (25%), food aversion (32%), and failure to thrive (63%).
Andersson Gronlund et al. (2011) identified ophthalmologic abnormalities in 17 of 18 children with Silver-Russell syndrome. Best corrected visual acuity of the better eye was less than 0.1 log of the minimal angle of resolution (less than 20/200; legal blindness) in 11 children, and 11 children had refractive errors. Anisometropia (greater than 1 diopter) was noted in 3 children. Subnormal stereo acuity and near point of convergence were found in 2 of 16 children. The total axial length in both eyes was shorter compared with that of controls. Of 16 children, 3 had small optic discs, 3 had large cup:disc ratio, and 4 had increased tortuosity of retinal vessels. Andersson Gronlund et al. (2011) recommended ophthalmologic examination for children with SRS.
Lokulo-Sodipe et al. (2020) described the clinical features of RSS in a cohort of 33 patients aged 13 years and older (median age, 29.6 years). Most of the patients (60.6%) had height below 2 standard deviations (median, -2.67) despite 70% having received growth hormone treatment. Characteristic childhood dysmorphisms seen in RSS, including triangular face, broad nasal tip, broad nasal bridge, retrognathia, and downslanting palpebral fissures, were seen in only a minority of patients. Features seen more commonly in this cohort included a broad forehead and facial dysmorphism (45%), relative macrocephaly (57.6%), low-set ears (57.6%), and posteriorly rotated ears (54.5%). Feeding issues were not commonly reported, although 18.2% had gastroesophageal reflux. In patients aged 18 years and older, 25% had impaired glucose tolerance, 33% had hypertension, and 52% had hypercholesterolemia. University degrees were completed in 40% of patients aged 21 years and older, which was consistent with educational achievement in the general UK population. There was not a significant correlation between quality of life assessment scores and height, although there was a negative correlation with BMI. Among the 25 patients aged 18 years or older, 9 had children, none of whom had RSS. Lokulo-Sodipe et al. (2020) concluded that the diagnosis of RSS in adults is difficult and requires molecular confirmation because many of the typical characteristics of RSS in childhood are not present in adulthood.
**Wilms tumor 2, 194071 (3), AD, Somatic mutation**



DDR2
**Spondylometaepiphyseal dysplasia, short limb-hand type, 271665 (3), AR**
Borochowitz et al. (1993) described 3 cases of a 'new' severe short-limb bone dysplasia, which they termed spondylometaepiphyseal dysplasia, short limb-hand type. The 3 unrelated patients were born into 2 separate Sephardic Jewish families and a Puerto Rican family. Abnormalities included small stature with short limbs and short hands, a short nose with broad nasal bridge and wide nostrils, a long philtrum, ocular hypertelorism, retro/micrognathia, and a narrow chest. Radiologic abnormalities included platyspondyly, short tubular bones with very abnormal metaphyses and epiphyses beyond early infancy, short ribs, and a typical evolution of bony changes. Histologic findings were described in 1 patient. The parents were related in 1 of the Sephardic Jewish families in which, in addition to the patient described, 2 other sibs, who did not survive infancy, were affected.
Langer et al. (1993) reported 8 additional cases of this short-limb dysplasia with a rather typical clinical appearance including similar facies and seemingly characteristic deformity of the anterior thorax and sternum. Because of abnormal premature calcification in cartilaginous structures, Langer et al. (1993) referred to the condition as the short limb-abnormal calcification type of SMED. Atlantoaxial instability resulting in cord damage and death occurred in 4 of the 8 patients of Langer et al. (1993). Seven of the 8 patients were Puerto Rican; of these, there was 1 pair of affected sibs and another family with 3 affected sibs. The stippled calcification might suggest chondrodysplasia calcificans punctata but the other features serve to differentiate the condition. Calcification of the falx cerebri was noted in 1 patient at age 20 months. Calcification of costochondral cartilages is presumably responsible for the unusual and perhaps characteristic deformity of the anterior chest and sternum. Parental consanguinity was established in 1 of the Puerto Rican families reported by Langer et al. (1993).
Al-Gazali et al. (1996) described 2 affected sibs (a girl and a boy), born of a consanguineous Egyptian couple. Both children showed extensive calcification of epiphyses, ligaments, and chondral tissues. Intellectual development of both patients was normal. Ali et al. (2010) reported that both of the sibs had died, one at age 13 years from respiratory complications and the other suddenly at age 8 years from cord compression.
Bargal et al. (2009) reported 8 patients with SMED-SL, bringing the total number of reported patients to 20. They confirmed that this dysplasia is progressive with respect to the severity of the bowing of the lower limbs and to the appearance of the calcifications.
Smithson et al. (2009) described a 7-year-old boy from Pakistan with clinical and radiologic features of a relatively mild case of SMED-SL.
Dias et al. (2009) described 2 female sibs with clinical and radiographic features consistent with SMED-SL, who died suddenly in infancy from cord compression because of foramen magnum stenosis. Dias et al. (2009) suggested that the characteristic shape of the metacarpals and phalanges seen at a young age in SMED-SL provide an important diagnostic handle so that appropriate management may be instituted early.
**Warburg-Cinotti syndrome, 618175 (3), AD**
Warburg-Cinotti syndrome is characterized by progressive corneal neovascularization, keloid formation, chronic skin ulcers, wasting of subcutaneous tissue, flexion contractures of the fingers, and acroosteolysis (Xu et al., 2018).
Warburg et al. (2006) described a 42-year-old Danish man with bilateral congenital blepharophimosis, who postoperatively had progressive corneal vascularization, which eventually developed into symblepharon. The patient also had conductive hearing loss, progressive acroosteolysis of the phalanges, arthropathy, loss of subcutaneous fat of the hands, feet, and face, and oligospermia, and he experienced spontaneous pneumothorax 4 times. Electron microscopy of a skin biopsy was consistent with normal epidermis with stimulated differentiation.
Cinotti et al. (2013) reported a 53-year-old Italian man who developed contractures at age 6 years, beginning in the interphalangeal joints and progressing from distal to proximal and from upper to lower limbs. The skin of his hands and feet thickened, and he developed webbing between the toes and progressive osteolysis, resulting in complete disappearance of the toes and distal metatarsals, as well as restrictive multilayered banding of the skin of the palms. At age 25, thickened hyperpigmented keloid plaques appeared at areas of scarring and slowly progressed in size. In the fourth and fifth decades of life, conjunctival pannus with corneal thinning developed in both eyes, and despite repeated surgical removal, the pannus rapidly recurred, eventually leaving only hand-motion vision bilaterally. Examination at age 45 showed severely deformed hands and feet, with multilayered restrictive fibrotic bands on the palms, hyperkeratotic verrucoid hyperpigmented skin on the legs, and bilateral amputation of toes. He also exhibited gum hypertrophy and gynecomastia. X-rays showed bilateral symmetric osteolytic lesions in hands and wrists, severe flexion deformities of the fingers, bony ankylosis of interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints, and complete bilateral osteolysis of the toes with ankylosis of the tibiotarsal joints. The authors noted similarities to the patient previously reported by Warburg et al. (2006), as well as phenotypic overlap with polyfibromatosis (see 126900).
Xu et al. (2018) studied 6 patients with Warburg-Cinotti syndrome, including the 2 men previously reported by Warburg et al. (2006) (patient 1) and Cinotti et al. (2013) (patient 2), a mother and 2 affected children (patients 3, 4, and 5), and an unrelated 35-year-old woman (patient 6). The 31-year-old mother developed keloid-like plaques at age 5 years, without preceding trauma or inflammation. At age 14, finger flexion contractures developed, which progressed to ankylosis of proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints and cutaneous fusion between the digits and palm. Surgical correction was followed by rapid recurrence. Gradual cutaneous fusion of the toes resulted in little or no separation of the toes. She also experienced numerous sterile abscesses of the hands and feet, followed by scarring, cutaneous fusions, and contractures. At age 25, she developed corneal neovascularization and subsequent pannus and symblepharon formation on the right eye; ultimately there was complete conjunctivalization of the cornea and visual acuity became hand-motion only. Although she had normal vision in her left eye, examination revealed limbal stem cell deficiency, superior corneal vascular pannus, central corneal thinning, and endothelial cell dysfunction with disruption of healthy hexagonal morphology on specular microscopy. Facial dysmorphism, shared with her affected children, included narrow nose, mild midface retrusion, and epicanthal folds. At age 31, she had generalized thin erythematous skin with follicular hyperkeratosis. X-rays showed relatively normal phalanges of the fingers with contractures, and small hypodense distal phalanges and deformed middle phalanges of the toes, with severe lateral angulation of distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints of toes 3 through 5. Her 8-year-old daughter had thin and somewhat lax skin, contractures of her fourth fingers with thickening of the skin over the flexor tendons, and bilateral superior corneal vascular pannus with central corneal thinning. The proband's 5-year-old son had enlargement of several PIP finger joints, mild flexion contractures of several DIP finger joints, and mild follicular hyperkeratosis, as well as prominent superior corneal vascular pannus. The unrelated 35-year-old woman had angiodermatofibromas and exhibited delayed wound healing with keloid-like scarring. She had hypermobile joints, contractures, and generalized enlargement of finger joints. Chronic ulcers on her toes resulted in loss of all toes and a significant portion of forefoot tissue. Facial features included bilateral blepharophimosis and epicanthus, thin nose with small alae nasi, large low-set ears, and high palate.



FMO3
**Trimethylaminuria, 602079 (3), AR**
Trimethylaminuria results from the abnormal presence of large amounts of volatile and malodorous trimethylamine within the body. This chemical, a tertiary aliphatic amine, is excreted in the urine, sweat (ichthyohidrosis), and breath, which take on the offensive odor of decaying fish (Mitchell, 1996).
Individuals with trimethylaminuria excrete relatively large amounts of amino-trimethylamine (TMA) in their urine, sweat, and breath, and exhibit a fishy body odor characteristic of the malodorous free amine, leading to the designation fish-odor syndrome. TMA is a product of intestinal bacterial action. The substrates from which it is derived are choline, which, bound to lecithin, is present most abundantly in egg yolk, liver, kidney, legumes, soy beans, and peas, as well as from trimethylamine-N-oxide, a normal constituent of saltwater fishes. Normally, TMA produced in the gut is absorbed and oxidized in the liver by FMO, a microsomal mixed-function oxidase (Higgins et al., 1972).
Humbert et al. (1970) first used the terms trimethylaminuria and fish-odor syndrome to describe a 6-year-old girl who intermittently had a fishy odor. She also had multiple pulmonary infections beginning in the neonatal period, the clinical stigmata of Turner syndrome but normal karyotype, splenomegaly, anemia, and neutropenia. Her urine contained increased amounts of TMA. In the same patient, Humbert et al. (1971) found defective membrane function in platelets, neutrophils, and red cells, and Higgins et al. (1972) found deficiency of trimethylamine oxidase by liver biopsy. Calvert (1973) noted that the features in the patient of Humbert et al. (1970) were those of Noonan syndrome (163950). He studied a clinically identical patient but found no trimethylaminuria with or without loading with trimethylamine. Witt et al. (1988) included the patient of Humbert et al. (1970) in their series of cases of Noonan syndrome with bleeding diathesis.
Lee et al. (1976) observed a brother and sister with trimethylaminuria; in both, an offensive fishy odor occurred when the mother was breast feeding them and had eaten eggs or fish. Danks et al. (1976) referred to 4 affected individuals in their personal experience.
Mayatepek and Kohlmuller (1998) described 2 unrelated children with transient trimethylaminuria. One was a 2-month-old female infant referred because of an offensive odor on her skin and from her urine which was noticed by the parents. When the child was 6 months old, the fishy odor completely disappeared. The second patient was a 4-year-old boy who was referred because of smelly urine and skin which had been noticed by his mother from about the age of 18 months. In these children, transient trimethylaminuria occurred without N-oxidation deficiency.
Zschocke et al. (1999) studied patients with mild trimethylaminuria and concluded that FMO3 deficiency is a spectrum of phenotypes that can include transient or mild malodor depending on environmental exposures. Mild FMO3 deficiency may have clinical relevance beyond intermittent body odor leading to an abnormal metabolism of drugs, hypertension, or increased cardiovascular disease risk.
Todd (1979) noted that patients with TMA may be deeply disturbed, depressed, and even suicidal, with psychosocial problems in school. Rehman (1999) also reported that patients with TMA often have psychosocial problems, including strong feelings of shame, embarrassment, low self-esteem, social isolation, anxiety, and depression.



TENM4
**Essential tremor, hereditary, 5, 616736 (3), AD**
Hereditary essential tremor-5 is an autosomal dominant neurologic disorder characterized by kinetic, intention, and/or postural tremor mainly affecting the upper limbs. The age at onset and severity are highly variable, even within families (summary by Hor et al., 2015).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of hereditary essential tremor, see ETM1 (190300).
Hor et al. (2015) reported 3 unrelated families of Spanish descent in which multiple individuals had essential tremor. Affected individuals had kinetic, postural, and/or intention tremor mainly affecting the upper limbs, but sometimes affecting the lower limbs and tongue. There was a wide range in the age at onset in all families, from adolescence to late adulthood, and the severity was variable.



HIKESHI
**Leukodystrophy, hypomyelinating, 13, 616881 (3), AR**
Hypomyelinating leukodystrophy-13 is an autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by infantile onset of delayed psychomotor development, axial hypotonia, and spasticity associated with delayed myelination and periventricular white matter abnormalities on brain imaging. More variable neurologic deficits, such as visual impairment, may also occur. Some patients may experience cardiac failure during acute illness (summary by Edvardson et al., 2016).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of HLD, see 312080.
Edvardson et al. (2016) reported 6 children from 3 unrelated families of Ashkenazi Jewish descent with a severe neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorder apparent since infancy. The patients presented with feeding difficulties, axial hypotonia, and failure to thrive, followed by significantly delayed psychomotor development with poor or absent language, progressively decreasing head circumference percentile (up to -2 SD), spasticity, increased muscle tone, hyperreflexia, and clonus, more prominent in the lower limbs. Three sibs in 1 family had optic atrophy, visual impairment, and nystagmus; 1 also had central conduction delay on brainstem auditory evoked response. All 3 sibs died suddenly after short febrile illnesses before 15 years of age; 1 of these sibs had heart failure, but autopsy was not performed. In a second family, 1 patient, hospitalized for a febrile illness, had transient left ventricular hypertrophy associated with acute perimyocarditis which resolved after the acute illness. One patient from the third family had ataxia. Brain imaging in all patients showed periventricular white matter abnormalities and delayed myelination, consistent with a leukodystrophy.



PLA2G4A
**Gastrointestinal ulceration, recurrent, with dysfunctional platelets, 618372 (3)**
Recurrent gastrointestinal ulceration with dysfunctional platelets (GURDP) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by onset of severe gastrointestinal mucosal ulceration in early childhood. Affected individuals may have secondary iron deficiency anemia or malnourishment. Studies of platelet aggregation show a functional defect associated with decreased thromboxane-A2 production and decreased eicosanoid biosynthesis. The gastrointestinal disease is believed to result from decreased or absent production of prostaglandins that protect the gut mucosa (summary by Adler et al., 2008 and Faioni et al., 2014).
Adler et al. (2008) reported a 45-year-old Italian man with a history of occult gastrointestinal blood loss, chronic anemia, iron deficiency, and abdominal pain as a child and young adult. He had multiple episodes of small bowel perforation necessitating 5 surgical interventions between 38 and 45 years of age. Histology showed multiple recurrent ulcerations of the gastrointestinal mucosa. Laboratory studies showed markedly reduced levels of thromboxane B2 and 12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid (12-HETE) produced by platelets and leukotriene B4 released from calcium ionophore-activated blood, consistent with an almost complete absence of the release of arachidonic acid (AA) during platelet activation. Platelet aggregation and degranulation induced by adenosine diphosphate or collagen were diminished, but normalized with the addition of AA.
Faioni et al. (2014) reported 27-year-old twins, a brother and sister, from a large Sardinian family, who had lifelong mucosal bleeding. The patients presented in the first years of life with epistaxis, gum bleeding, gastrointestinal bleeding, hematuria, and recurrent duodenal ulcers. The sister had menorrhagia resulting in iron deficiency anemia. Platelet function studies showed normal aggregation and secretion by AA, but impaired aggregation and secretion by collagen. Serum eicosanoids, including thromboxane-B2 (TxB2) and 12-HETE, were extremely low. The overall findings suggested a defect in the arachidonate pathway of platelet activation, with decreased production of thromboxane-A2 from endogenous AA. In addition, both patients and their mother had mildly decreased levels of coagulation factor XI (F11; 264900) (about 60% of normal values), which may have contributed to the bleeding. The brother also developed mildly impaired renal function at age 13 years; this remained stable. Faioni et al. (2014) suggested that the early onset of duodenal ulcers was likely due to the severe deficiency of eicosanoids that protect the gastrointestinal mucosa. Family members who were heterozygous carriers of the mutation had increased prevalence of duodenal ulcers before age 40 and showed borderline low serum levels of TxB2, but none had a bleeding diathesis.
Brooke et al. (2014) reported a brother and sister from a small region in Serbia with onset of severe gastrointestinal disease before 4 years of age. They first presented with peptic ulceration, bleeding, and pyloric stenosis, and both underwent vagotomy and eventually gastroenterostomy or gastrojejunostomy for disease recurrence. Over the following 40 years, both patients continued to have significant gastrointestinal mucosal ulcerations affecting the small bowel, esophagus, and bile duct, with fistulas, strictures, and adhesions from multiple surgeries. Both were malnourished. They were given a provisional diagnosis of 'cryptogenic multifocal ulcerating stenosing enteritis (CMUSE).' Brooke et al. (2014) noted that the lesions resembled those associated with the use of NSAIDs, which reduce prostaglandin production. In addition, the sister had recurrent infections with Candida albicans, Campylobacter, Salmonella, and Staphylococcus, which may implicate immune dysregulation. Patient platelet studies showed impaired aggregation in response to stimulation by collagen, but normal aggregation with the addition of AA, as well as decreased production of TxA2, indicating a defect in PLA2G4A-mediated AA release. These findings were similar to those observed in normal patients treated with aspirin.



CFHR1
**{Hemolytic uremic syndrome, atypical, susceptibility to}, 235400 (3), AR, AD**
Typical hemolytic uremic syndrome is characterized by acute renal failure, thrombocytopenia, and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia associated with distorted erythrocytes ('burr cells'). The vast majority of cases (90%) are sporadic, occur in children under 3 years of age, and are associated with epidemics of diarrhea caused by verotoxin-producing E. coli. The death rate is very low, about 30% of cases have renal sequelae, and there is usually no relapse of the disease. This form of HUS usually presents with a diarrhea prodrome (thus referred to as D+HUS) and has a good prognosis in most cases. In contrast, a subgroup of patients with HUS have an atypical presentation (aHUS or D-HUS) without a prodrome of enterocolitis and diarrhea and have a much poorer prognosis, with a tendency to relapse and frequent development of end-stage renal failure or death. These cases tend to be familial. Both autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant inheritance have been reported (Goodship et al., 1997; Taylor, 2001; Veyradier et al., 2003; Noris et al., 2003). Noris and Remuzzi (2009) provided a detailed review of atypical HUS.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome
Atypical HUS is a genetically heterogeneous condition. Susceptibility to the development of the disorder can be conferred by mutations in various components of or regulatory factors in the complement cascade system (Jozsi et al., 2008). See AHUS2 (612922), AHUS3 (612923), AHUS4 (612924), AHUS5 (612925), and AHUS6 (612926). AHUS7 (see 615008) is caused by mutation in the DGKE gene (601440), which is not part of the complement cascade system.
Hagge et al. (1967) reported the hemolytic uremic syndrome in 2 sibs. Features included intravascular hemolysis, thrombocytopenia, and azotemia. One had repeated attacks ending in renal failure and death at age 8 years; the other recovered completely after one attack. Chan et al. (1969) reported HUS in 2 adopted, unrelated sibs.
Kaplan et al. (1975) reported HUS in 3 sibs and reviewed reports of 21 sibships with 2 or more affected individuals. Two groups of families could be identified among 41 analyzed. Sibs whose onset was within a short time of each other had a relatively good prognosis (19% mortality). Those whose onset was more than a year apart had a poorer prognosis (68% mortality). Kaplan et al. (1975) suggested that an environmental agent was causative in the first group and that genetic factors were important in the second. Most of the first group of families came from an endemic area, whereas most of the second group came from a nonendemic area.
Blattler et al. (1975) studied a family in which 4 sibs had died from HUS. The parents and 4 surviving sibs had normal renal function and normal platelet and fibrinogen survival. The mother and 3 sibs had an increased percentage of megathrombocytes. Two of them showed renal accumulation of Cr 51-platelet radioactivity and ultrastructural changes of the endothelium on renal biopsy.
Edelsten and Tuck (1978) reported a family with HUS inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern.
Thompson and Winterborn (1981) reported an 8-month-old Asian boy with very low levels of plasma factor H who presented with the hemolytic uremic syndrome. Complement component C3 (120700) was also depleted. A healthy 3-year-old brother had the same complement profile, suggesting activation of the alternative complement pathway. The parents, who were first cousins, had half-normal levels of factor H.
Kirchner et al. (1982) described this disorder in mother and daughter. The daughter's illness, characterized primarily by renal insufficiency, was most compatible with adult hemolytic uremic syndrome and the mother's illness, with prominent neurologic findings, was most compatible with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. Merrill et al. (1985) reported 2 certain cases and 3 possible case in 2 generations of a North Carolina black family.
Neuhaus et al. (1997) reported clinical features of atypical D-HUS in 23 children. Features included requirement for dialysis (74%), hypertension (43%), cardiomyopathy (43%), and cerebral convulsions (48%). Only 5 patients (26%), including 4 infants, recovered completely. Six patients (32%) had 1 to 10 recurrences and 8 (42%) developed end-stage renal failure. Four children died.
Warwicker et al. (1998) reported a 36-year-old man with sporadic relapsing aHUS. He had anemia, thrombocytopenia, hypertension, and acute renal failure. Renal biopsy showed a thrombotic microangiopathy and deposition of complement component C3 in vessel walls. He had half-normal serum levels of factor H and decreased levels of C3, consistent with activation of the alternative complement pathway. HUS recurred after renal transplantation. Molecular analysis revealed a heterozygous 4-bp deletion in the CFH gene (134370.0011).
Ohali et al. (1998) reported a large consanguineous Bedouin family in which 10 infants had atypical HUS characterized by microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, acute renal failure, severe hypertension, edema, and increased serum triglycerides. All had very early onset with a median presentation at age 2 weeks. Two patients died during the first disease episode; the remaining 8 patients had a mean number of 4 relapses despite treatment. In total, 8 patients died at ages 3 weeks to 10 months. Factor H levels were low to undetectable in all 4 patients studied, and C3 levels were decreased in 9 of 10 infants tested. Four kidney biopsies showed marked arteriolar changes, including stenosis, edema, and thickening of the intima. Glomerular changes included swelling of endothelial cells with microvillus transformation and proliferation of mesangial cells with increased matrix deposition in the mesangium. Other changes included fibrotic changes in glomeruli and the tubulointerstitium, as well as C3 deposition in capillary walls.
Rougier et al. (1998) reported 6 children with complement factor H deficiency and acute glomerular disease. Five of the 6 children presented with hemolytic uremic syndrome. Two of the children were from a consanguineous family from Turkey and exhibited a homozygous deficiency characterized by absence of the 150-kD form of factor H.
Noris et al. (2003) reported a 21-year-old woman and her affected brother. Disease onset in the sister (the proband) was at age 16 months, when she developed fever, hemolytic anemia, and thrombocytopenia. At the time, renal function was normal. Thereafter she had 6 recurrences of thrombotic microangiopathy, all associated with deteriorating renal function. Treatment consisted of plasma exchange and infusions, steroids, and blood transfusions, which led to complete recovery of blood abnormalities and renal function. The last episode occurred at age 20 years and was characterized by anemia, thrombocytopenia, and severe impairment of renal function. Renal biopsy showed irreversible changes of chronic nephropathy with typical features of HUS, including diffuse narrowing/occlusion of vessels and severe glomerular ischemia. At the age of 21 years she was on chronic dialysis. The proband's brother had 2 episodes of HUS at age 9 years. Both were characterized by severe hemolytic anemia and acute renal insufficiency and resolved without plasma treatment, with no renal sequelae.
**{Macular degeneration, age-related, reduced risk of}, 603075 (3), AD**
Age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is a progressive degeneration of photoreceptors and underlying retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells in the macula region of the retina. It is a highly prevalent disease and a major cause of blindness in the Western world. Drusen, pale excrescences of variable size, and other deposits accumulate below the RPE on the Bruch membrane; clinical and histopathologic investigations have shown that these extracellular deposits are the hallmark of early ARMD. As ARMD advances, areas of geographic atrophy of the RPE can cause visual loss, or choroidal neovascularization can occur to cause wet, or exudative, ARMD with accompanying central visual loss (summary by De et al., 2007).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Age-Related Macular Degeneration
ARMD2 (153800) is associated with mutation in the ABCR gene (601691) on chromosome 1p, and ARMD3 (608895) is caused by mutation in the FBLN5 gene (604580) on chromosome 14q31. Up to 50% of the attributable risk of age-related macular degeneration (ARMD4; 610698) appears to be explained by a polymorphism in the CFH gene (134370.0008). ARMD5 (613761) and ARMD6 (613757) are associated with mutation in the ERCC6 (609413) and RAX2 (610362) genes, respectively. ARMD7 (610149) and ARMD8 (613778), which both represent susceptibility linked to chromosome 10q26, are associated with single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the HTRA1 (602194) and ARMS2 (611313) genes, respectively. ARMD9 (611378) is associated with single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the C3 gene (120700). ARMD10 (611488) maps to chromosome 9q32 and may be associated with a polymorphism in the TLR4 gene (603030). ARMD11 (611953) is association with variation in the CST3 gene (604312); ARMD12 (613784) with variation in the CX3CR1 gene (601470); and ARMD13 (615439) with variation in the CFI gene (217030). ARMD14 (615489) is associated with variation in or near the C2 (613927) and CFB (138470) genes on chromosome 6p21. ARMD15 (615591) is associated with variation in the C9 gene (120940). There is evidence for a form of ARMD caused by mutation in the mitochondrial gene MTTL1 (590050).
A haplotype carrying deletion of the complement factor H-related genes CFHR1 (134371) and CFHR3 (605336) is also associated with reduced risk of ARMD.
Lotery and Trump (2007) reviewed the molecular biology of age-related macular degeneration and tabulated the genes associated with ARMD, including those with only positive findings versus genes for which conflicting results have been found.
Age-related macular degeneration is the most common cause of acquired visual impairment in the elderly and is estimated to affect at least 11 million individuals in the United States. U.S. studies showed that mild forms of ARMD occur in nearly 30% of those 75 years and older, and advanced forms occur in about 7% of people in this age group. Allikmets et al. (1997) noted that ARMD is divided clinically into 2 subtypes: 80% of patients have 'dry' ARMD, the hallmarks of which include 1 or more of the following: the presence of cellular debris (drusen) in or under the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), irregularities in the pigmentation of the RPE, or geographic atrophy (GA). Twenty percent of patients have exudative or 'wet' ARMD characterized by serous detachment of the RPE or choroidal neovascularization (CNV), or both. Severe vision loss is associated most often with geographic atrophy or exudative disease.
Streiff and Babel (1963) described senile macular changes in an 80-year-old mother and her 50-year-old daughter. Because of the late onset of the abnormality, dominant inheritance is more likely, and affected members of successive generations are not likely to be observed. Braley (1966) stated that senile macular degeneration runs in families: 'Nearly every patient I have seen has had other members of the family similarly affected.' Visual disturbance without ophthalmoscopic findings may be present by age 50 and fundus changes become apparent only after age 70. Meyers and Zachary (1988) described a family in which 6 of 13 children had age-related macular degeneration; 2 of the affected sibs were identical twins in whom monozygosity was established (with 99.4% likelihood) by genetic tests.
Postel et al. (2005) compared the phenotype between 411 singleton and 125 multiplex probands with ARMD and found the clinical appearance and distribution of ARMD grades to be similar. There was no statistically significant difference in grade distribution between the 2 groups. Postel et al. (2005) concluded that singleton and multiplex ARMD data could be combined for consolidated genetic analyses.
Bok (2002) stated there was widespread agreement among ophthalmologists that numerous large drusen, when present in both eyes, represent a significant risk factor for the evolution of early ARMD into more advanced ARMD, with loss of central vision.
In a population-based cohort study, Klein et al. (2003) examined the relationship of 2 diseases associated with systemic inflammatory response, emphysema and gout, and selected markers of systemic inflammation with the 10-year incidence of age-related maculopathy. They found a modest relationship between both increased white blood cell count and emphysema and the increased 10-year incidence of lesions defining early and late age-related maculopathy.
Phipps et al. (2003) found that cone adaptational kinetics were affected early in age-related maculopathy, while the visual acuity was still good.
Retinal angiomatous proliferation (RAP) is a neovascularization that begins in the retina and extends through the subretinal space, eventually communicating with choroidal neovascularization. It occurs in 10 to 15% of neovascular ARMD cases (Ghazi, 2002). It has a poor natural history and shows resistance to treatment with conventional laser photocoagulation (Yannuzzi et al., 2001).
Scholl et al. (2004) reported close agreement between the grading of stereoscopic color slides and digitized nonstereoscopic images. Digitized nonstereoscopic color images of the macula proved to be useful for grading age-related maculopathy (ARM) and ARMD.
In a review of epidemiologic data regarding the natural history of ARMD and its risk factors, Klein et al. (2004) found that large soft drusen associated with pigmentary abnormalities increased the risk of progression to advanced ARMD. Large soft drusen might fade over time. Advanced ARMD was more likely to be present in whites than in blacks, despite the similar prevalence of soft drusen in both groups. Neovascular ARMD was more frequent than geographic atrophy in most population-based studies in whites in America, Australia, and the Netherlands than in similar population-based studies in Iceland and Norway. After age and family history, there were few consistent relationships of risk factors to ARMD. Of these, the relationships of smoking, hypertension, and cataract surgery to advanced ARMD had been the most consistent.
Maruko et al. (2007) studied the clinical characteristics of 189 consecutive Japanese patients newly diagnosed with neovascular ARMD at one hospital and found that their features differed from those reported in white patients. In Japanese patients, there was a preponderance of polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy (PCV), male gender, unilaterality, and absence of drusen in the second eye, with the exception of RAP.
In a review on the association of cigarette smoking and ARMD, Thornton et al. (2005) found that the estimate of risk was about 2- to 3-fold higher in current smokers when compared with never smokers in 13 studies. They concluded that cigarette smoking is an important risk factor for ARMD.
Chakravarthy et al. (2007) examined the association between cigarette smoking and ARMD in 158 cases of ARMD (109 neovascular and 49 GA) in a European population. Current smokers had increased odds of neovascular ARMD or geographic atrophy, whereas for ex-smokers the odds were less. Compared with people with unilateral ARMD, those with bilateral ARMD were more likely to have a history of heavy smoking in the previous 25 years. The attributable fraction for ARMD due to smoking was 27%. Chakravarthy et al. (2007) concluded that their findings highlighted the need for increasing public awareness of the risks associated with smoking.
In a longitudinal study using the Blue Mountains Eye Study cohort in Australia, Tan et al. (2007) assessed the relationship between cardiovascular disease and cardiovascular risk factors, other than smoking, and risk of long-term incident ARMD. Increasing high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol was inversely related to incident late ARMD. Elevated total-HDL cholesterol ratio predicted late ARMD and geographic atrophy (GA). Diabetes predicted incident GA, but not neovascular ARMD. History of stroke predicted incident early ARMD and incident indistinct soft or reticular drusen. Neither pulse pressure, systolic or diastolic blood pressure reading, nor presence of hypertension at baseline was associated with incident ARMD. Tan et al. (2007) stated that their findings provided evidence of links between cardiovascular risk factors and ARMD but that further prospective evaluation of these relationships was warranted.
In a longitudinal study using the Blue Mountains Eye Study cohort, Tan et al. (2007) found that, after controlling for age, gender, and other confounding factors, statin users, compared with nonusers, had a reduced risk of developing indistinct soft drusen, the principal late ARMD precursor lesion.
Nolan et al. (2007) identified a relative lack of macular pigment as an independent risk factor for ARMD.
Pang et al. (2015) examined 230 eyes of 150 consecutive patients with neovascular AMD and 40 human donor eyes with a histopathologic diagnosis of neovascular AMD for layered, hyperreflective, subretinal pigment epithelium (sub-RPE) lines, known as the onion sign. Sixteen (7%) of the 230 eyes and 2 (5%) of the 40 donor eyes had onion signs on spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT). In all 16 eyes, the onion sign persisted in follow-up for up to 5 years, with fluctuations in the abundance of lines and association with intraretinal hyperreflective foci. Histologic analysis of the 2 donor eyes revealed that the hyperreflective lines correlated with clefts created by extraction of cholesterol crystals during tissue processing.
Joachim et al. (2015) reported the incidence and progression of ARMD over 15 years, beginning with 3,654 participants aged 49 years or older, and ending with 1,149 of the remaining participants, in the Blue Mountains Eye Study. The 15-year incidence was 22.7% for early ARMD and 6.8% for late ARMD; after adjusting for competing risks, early and late ARMD incidence was 15.1% and 4.1%, respectively. Women had a higher incidence of any ARMD compared with men. Risk of progression to late ARMD was strongly associated with severity of early ARMD lesions.
ARMD1
In a family studied by Klein et al. (1998), 10 members with ARMD showed the presence of large, soft, confluent drusen (see 126700) accompanied by varying degrees of RPE degeneration and/or geographic atrophy. Age at diagnosis of ARMD ranged from 54 to 77 years (average, 65 years). In the 8 affected patients with visual symptoms, onset was between age 52 and 75 years (average, 67 years). The clinical picture was described as 'a predominantly dry phenotype.'
Pras et al. (2015) studied a 3-generation Tunisian Jewish family in which 5 elderly sibs had advanced ARMD. All were first diagnosed in the seventh decade of life, and all experienced progression to severe vision impairment within 10 years. Funduscopy and optical coherence tomography showed a variety of pathology, including macular hemorrhage, large hard drusen, massive depigmentation and geographic atrophy of the RPE, and choroidal neovascularization with resultant juxtafoveal scarring. Fluorescein angiography displayed early hyperfluorescence due to the simultaneous occurrence of many large foci of 'window defect' RPE atrophy as well as 'starry sky' staining of basal laminar drusen extending peripherally. Of 9 asymptomatic offspring in the next generation of the family, 7 had normal macular appearance whereas 2 sisters, aged 39 and 48 years, exhibited altered foveal reflexes with hypopigmentation.



LRP6
**{Coronary artery disease, autosomal dominant, 2}, 610947 (3), AD**
From a screen of patients and families with coronary artery disease (CAD), Mani et al. (2007) identified an extreme outlier kindred with extraordinary prevalence of early CAD. The kindred, of Iranian ancestry, was ascertained by the proband who presented with myocardial infarction (MI) at the age of 48. His CAD risk factors included hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes mellitus. He had never smoked, and his body mass index (BMI) was 24. He had critical stenosis of all 3 major coronary arteries, which led to coronary artery bypass grafting. He had progressive atherosclerosis of the grafts and internal carotid arteries. At age 62 he suffered a low impact hip fracture and was found to have severe osteoporosis of unknown cause. He died of a stroke at the age of 72. Among 58 blood relatives of the index case, 28 were diagnosed with early CAD, defined as MI, angina, or sudden cardiac death at or before age 50 in men or 55 in women. Of these, 23 had died from CAD, with a mean age at death of 52 years. In contrast, kindred members without early CAD died at a mean age of 81. Detailed clinical data were obtained for all available kindred members, including 13 affected with early CAD, 5 free of early CAD at or beyond the age threshold, and 9 younger asymptomatic members with a mean age of 35. Cardiac risk factors before or at presentation among affected subjects were surprisingly homogeneous, including high fasting LDL cholesterol in all (mean 176.4 mg/dl, normal less than 130 mg/dl), high fasting triglycerides in 90% (mean 240 mg/dl, normal less than 150 mg/dl), marked hypertension in all (mean 175/103 mm Hg, normal less than 140/90; typically diagnosed after age 40), and type 2 diabetes mellitus (see 125853) in 77% (fasting blood sugar greater than 126 mg/dl; typically diagnosed after hypertension and hyperlipidemia). Despite high triglycerides, HDL levels were normal in all, and only 1 had a history of smoking.
**Tooth agenesis, selective, 7, 616724 (3), AD**
Massink et al. (2015) studied affected individuals from 4 unrelated families segregating autosomal dominant nonsyndromic oligodontia. The probands all had a high number of missing teeth, ranging from 12 to 20 (excluding the third molars), whereas the number of missing teeth in other affected family members ranged from 4 to 16. Three of the 10 affected individuals exhibited taurodontism. Incomplete penetrance was demonstrated in 1 family in which a carrier mother was unaffected. The dental phenotype appeared to be nonsyndromic, although in 1 family, an affected father and 2 daughters showed minor anatomical variation of the ear and underdevelopment of the thumb.



SKI
**Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome, 182212 (3), AD**
Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome is a disorder comprising craniosynostosis, a marfanoid habitus, and skeletal, neurologic, cardiovascular, and connective tissue anomalies. There appears to be a characteristic facies involving hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, high-arched palate, micrognathia, and low-set posteriorly rotated ears. Other commonly reported manifestations include hypotonia, developmental delay, and inguinal or umbilical hernia; the most common skeletal manifestations are arachnodactyly, pectus deformity, camptodactyly, scoliosis, and joint hypermobility (summary by Robinson et al., 2005).
There is considerable phenotypic overlap between SGS and Marfan syndrome (MFS; 154700) and Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS; see 609192): SGS includes virtually all of the craniofacial, skeletal, skin, and cardiovascular manifestations of MFS and LDS, with the additional findings of mental retardation and severe skeletal muscle hypotonia (summary by Doyle et al., 2012).
In 2 unrelated boys, Shprintzen and Goldberg (1982) described a 'new' syndrome of craniosynostosis associated with severe exophthalmos, maxillary and mandibular hypoplasia, soft tissue hypertrophy of the palatal shelves, low-set ears with soft and pliable auricles, multiple abdominal hernias, arachnodactyly, and camptodactyly. Functional disorders included infantile hypotonia, developmental delay, mental retardation, and obstructive apnea. The marked soft tissue of the palatal shelves created a 'pseudocleft' of the palate. Pectus carinatum was present in one of the boys and pectus excavatum in the other.
Gorlin et al. (1990) discussed Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS) and related syndromes.
Ades et al. (1995) delineated the distinct skeletal abnormalities of the Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome on the basis of 4 affected girls. Three of them showed bowing of long bones (with a variable degree of progression over time), flare of the metaphyses, a large anterior fontanel with persistent patency into the second to fourth years of life, 13 pairs of ribs, distinct vertebral abnormalities that were absent neonatally but evolved by the second year of life, and progressive osteopenia. Communicating hydrocephalus was present in all 4 cases. Arachnodactyly was illustrated as well as a superior folding of the helix of the ear, reminiscent of that in congenital contractural arachnodactyly (121050). Two of the patients were monozygotic twin girls and another sister was case 4. Apart from this family, all known cases were sporadic. The 3 sibs were products of a nonconsanguineous union, and there had been no previous documented instance of parental consanguinity. Ades et al. (1995) concluded that SGS is probably a generalized connective tissue dysplasia. Saal et al. (1995) reported another female patient with the craniosynostosis and marfanoid phenotype. The disorder was detected prenatally by the presence of a cloverleaf skull. She also had choanal atresia and stenosis. One of the patients reported by Ades et al. (1995) had intestinal malrotation and anteriorly placed anus. Shah et al. (1996) reported an Indian patient with the association of Marfan syndrome (with a dilated aortic root and atlantoaxial dislocation) and the fusion of coronal and sagittal skull sutures.
Hassed et al. (1997) described a boy with Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome, presumably the twelfth patient to be reported. In addition to the commonly described anomalies of individuals with SGS, this patient also had cranial asymmetry, hypotonia, osteopenia, and hydrocephalus.
Greally et al. (1998) presented 4 new patients with SGS and reviewed 1 of the patients in the original report of Shprintzen and Goldberg (1982). They concluded that radiologic investigations are particularly helpful in differentiating SGS from other syndromes with craniosynostosis and marfanoid habitus. Abnormality of the first and second cervical vertebrae, hydrocephalus, dilatation of the lateral ventricles, and a Chiari-I malformation of the brain were found only in the patients with Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome. Pectus excavatum and striking arachnodactyly were pictured.
Stoll (2002) reported a 24-year follow-up of a patient with SGS. Dysmorphic features were noted in infancy and became more pronounced over time. These included brachycephaly, posteriorly rotated floppy ears, shallow orbits, hypertelorism, midfacial hypoplasia, a narrow palate, sagittal synostosis, arachnodactyly, camptodactyly, pectus excavatum, scoliosis, bilateral inguinal and crural hernias, fragile skin, and lack of subcutaneous fat. Pectus excavatum was severe and scoliosis worsened during adolescence. Foot deformities included hallux varus, metatarsophalangeal dislocation, hammertoes and tarsometatarsal dislocation. There was also bilateral dislocation of the radial heads. Myopia was present and worsened over time. Height and weight were reduced initially but final adult height was normal. Puberty was delayed. Despite initial psychomotor developmental delay, the patient had no resulting mental retardation. No mutation was found in the gene encoding fibrillin-1.
Loeys et al. (2005) compared the clinical features of their series of cases with the Loeys-Dietz syndrome with that of SGS as presented by Greally et al. (1998) and with Marfan syndrome. Cleft palate/bifid uvula was present in 100% of cases of LDS, in none of the MFS patients, and in 1 of 15 SGS cases. Aortic root aneurysm was present in 16 of 16 cases of LDS and 2 of 15 of SGS. Arterial tortuosity was present in 11 of 11 LDS cases and was not associated with the other 2 conditions. Blue sclerae were present in 8 of 13 LDS patients and were not associated with the other 2 conditions. Ectopia lentis was not present in any of the 16 cases of LDS. Patent ductus arteriosus and atrial septal defect were present in 54% and 31%, respectively, of LDS cases but were not associated with the other 2 conditions.
Robinson et al. (2005) reported 13 unrelated patients and 1 sib with SGS and compared their clinical findings with those of 23 previously reported individuals. They suggested that there is a characteristic facial appearance, with more than two-thirds of all individuals having hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, a high-arched palate, micrognathia, and apparently low-set and posteriorly rotated ears.
The related disorders SGS and Furlong syndrome (LDS; see 609192) feature marfanoid habitus and craniosynostosis. Megarbane and Hokayem (1998) suggested dividing craniosynostosis with marfanoid habitus into 2 types: type 1, with mental retardation (SGS), and type 2, with normal intelligence and aortic root anomalies (Furlong syndrome).
Ades et al. (2006) questioned the diagnosis of SGS in one of the patients of Greally et al. (1998) and in the patient of Stoll (2002).



DNM1L
**Encephalopathy, lethal, due to defective mitochondrial peroxisomal fission 1, 614388 (3), AR, AD**
Encephalopathy due to defective mitochondrial and peroxisomal fission-1 (EMPF1) is characterized by delayed psychomotor development and hypotonia that may lead to death in childhood. Many patients develop refractory seizures, consistent with an epileptic encephalopathy, and thereafter show neurologic decline. The age at onset, features, and severity are variable, and some patients may not have clinical evidence of mitochondrial or peroxisomal dysfunction (summary by Sheffer et al., 2016; Fahrner et al., 2016).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Encephalopathy Due to Defective Mitochondrial And Peroxisomal Fission
See also EMPF2 (617086), caused by mutation in the MFF gene (614785) on chromosome 2q36.
Waterham et al. (2007) reported a newborn girl, born of unrelated Caucasian parents of British ancestry, with a systemic disorder resulting in death in infancy. The mother noted diminished fetal movements during pregnancy. After birth, the infant was well for several days, but presented in the first week of life with poor feeding and neurologic impairment, including hypotonia, little spontaneous movement, no tendon reflexes, no response to light stimulation, and poor visual fixation. She was mildly dysmorphic, with microcephaly, deep-set eyes, and a pointed chin. Optic discs were pale and cupped, and MRI showed an abnormal gyral pattern in both frontal lobes that extended to the perisylvian areas and was associated with dysmyelination. Laboratory studies showed persistent lactic acidemia and mildly elevated plasma concentration of very long-chain fatty acids. She died suddenly at 37 days of age. Studies of patient fibroblasts did not show defects in mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation or in mitochondrial complex activities, and muscle biopsy was essentially normal with no ragged-red fibers. However, immunofluorescence microscopic analyses showed fewer peroxisomes in fibroblasts compared to controls, and the peroxisomes varied markedly in size and were frequently arranged in rows. This arrangement was similar to that seen in mammalian cells overexpressing dominant-negative mutant DLP1 or those with DLP1 expression that had been downregulated owing to RNA interference (Koch et al., 2003; Li and Gould, 2003). Because such mammalian cells also showed a defect in mitochondrial fission (Smirnova et al., 2001; Yoon et al., 2001), Waterham et al. (2007) studied the mitochondria of fibroblasts from the patient using a fluorescent mitochondrial probe. Mitochondria in the patient's fibroblasts were elongated, tangled, tubular structures concentrated predominantly around the nucleus.
Sheffer et al. (2016) reported a 2-year-old boy, born of unrelated Arab parents, with a severe neurologic disorder characterized by neonatal hypotonia and respiratory insufficiency, delayed psychomotor development, and insensitivity to pain. At age 2 years, he could crawl, but not stand or speak. He had postnatal microcephaly, poor overall growth, athetoid movements, drooling, broad thumbs and big toes, and reduced muscle tone; there were no significant dysmorphic features. Brain imaging suggested delayed myelination. Plasma lactate was mildly increased, and patient fibroblasts showed isolated mitochondrial complex IV deficiency, as well as decreased ATP production and oxygen consumption (decreased by 30 and 40%, respectively). Mitochondria isolated from patient fibroblasts showed an elongated morphology, but peroxisomes appeared normal and there was no biochemical evidence of a peroxisomal defect.
Vanstone et al. (2016) reported a 7-year-old boy, born of unrelated Caucasian parents, with severely delayed psychomotor development and onset of refractory epilepsy at about 1 year of age. He had clonic, focal, and generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and experienced several episodes of status epilepticus. He was nonambulatory and had few words. He did not have significant dysmorphic features, and brain imaging was normal. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed the presence of concentric cristae and/or increased dense granules in some mitochondria, and many subsarcolemmal mitochondrial aggregates on electron microscopy. Confocal microscopy of patient fibroblasts showed hyperfusion of the mitochondrial network. However, respiratory chain enzymologies in muscle and skin fibroblasts and lactate/pyruvate ratio in fibroblasts were normal, as was serum lactate. There was no evidence of peroxisomal dysfunction. Vanstone et al. (2016) noted the diagnostic difficulties given that this patient had no clinical evidence of mitochondrial dysfunction on standard screening tests, and suggested that the disorder may result from abnormal mitochondrial distribution within neurons.
Fahrner et al. (2016) reported 2 unrelated boys who presented at 4 to 5 years of age with epileptic encephalopathy and subsequent neurologic decline after normal early development. Both children had metabolic insults prior to the sudden onset of status epilepticus: one patient developed seizures 2 weeks following a DTaP booster vaccination, whereas the other developed seizures after a viral illness and minor head trauma. Both had refractory epilepsy followed by developmental regression and progressive neurologic decline. One child had difficulty walking, dysphasia, and cognitive decline. The second child was wheelchair-bound with profound global developmental delay, myoclonus, and hypertonia; he had a tracheostomy and G-tube. Both patients continued to have seizures, and brain imaging showed progressive diffuse cerebral atrophy, particularly affecting the hippocampus, as well as nonspecific signal changes in the thalamus. Serum lactate was normal, and muscle biopsy of 1 patient was normal.
Chao et al. (2016) reported a boy with EMPF1 manifest as global developmental delay, hypotonia, and status epilepticus. He had normal development until 5 months of age, when he developed seizures followed by neurodevelopmental regression. Brain imaging showed progressive cerebral volume loss, demyelination, thinning of the corpus callosum, and T2-weighted hyperintense lesions in the cortex. Serum lactate levels were initially normal, but became elevated around 4 years of age. Muscle biopsy showed mild reduction of mitochondrial respiratory chain activities and mitochondrial pleomorphism. He died at 5 years of age due to severe status epilepticus with respiratory failure.
Vandeleur et al. (2019) reported a female infant who was microcephalic and had failure to thrive at 4 months of age. At 6 months of age, she had gross motor delay, truncal hypotonia, increased startle response, decreased visual tracking, and lactic acidosis. A brain MRI showed reduced white matter volume. At 8 months of age, she had poor feeding, diarrhea, and reduced urine output, and an echocardiogram showed a dilated left ventricle, reduced ejection fraction, and reduced shortening fraction. She died at 8 months of age of congestive heart failure and cardiogenic shock. Postmortem evaluation showed mitochondrial cardiomyopathy characterized by abnormal cardiac myocytes with enlarged mitochondria. Neuropathology showed accumulation of intracellular organelles, such as mitochondria, in the midbrain, cerebellum, and pons, as well as reduction in myelination in the subcortical white matter.
Autosomal Recessive Inheritance
Yoon et al. (2016) reported 2 infant sibs, born of unrelated Filipino parents with EMPF resulting in death in infancy. Both presented at birth with profound hypotonia, absent respiratory effort, no spontaneous movements, and absent deep tendon reflexes. Brain imaging was normal in 1 infant, whereas it showed a profound hypoxic-ischemic insult in the other. Laboratory studies did not show increased serum lactate or biochemical evidence of a peroxisomal disorder. The patients died at ages 8 days and 3 weeks. Postmortem examination showed intracytoplasmic hyaline eosinophilic round globules in neurons in both the brain and spinal cord. Electron microscopy of hippocampal neurons and Purkinje cells of the cerebellum showed multiple giant mitochondria that contained elongated cristae arranged parallel to each other. Giant mitochondria were not identified in glial or nonneuronal cells. The spinal cord showed reduced myelin content and the posterior nerve roots were poorly myelinated; peripheral nerves also showed poor myelination with a marked reduction in numbers of myelinated axons. Examination of skeletal muscle showed no abnormalities. The myelination defects in the peripheral nervous system were consistent with the absence of deep tendon reflexes and profound muscle weakness in both patients. Whole-exome sequencing identified compound heterozygous truncating mutations in the DNM1L gene (603850.0004 and 603850.0005) in both sibs, consistent with a complete loss of function. Sural nerve samples revealed absent DNM1L protein in both patients compared to an age-matched control. Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for 1 of the mutations. The findings confirmed the central role of DNM1L and mitochondrial fission in normal human development and survival. Yoon et al. (2016) noted the autosomal recessive inheritance pattern in this family, resulting from loss-of-function mutations, which differed from previously reported patients with de novo heterozygous mutations in the DNM1L gene that presumably resulted in a gain of function.
Nasca et al. (2016) reported 2 brothers, aged 16 and 3 years, with a slowly progressive neurologic disorder characterized by delayed psychomotor development that became apparent at about 1 year of age. The patients had strabismus, oculomotor apraxia, dysarthria, dysmetria, hyperreflexia, pyramidal signs, and severe walking difficulties. Brain imaging of the older brother showed minor abnormalities in the subthalamic nucleus. Fibroblasts derived from the older patient showed isolated partial complex IV deficiency (53% of controls) and decreased mtDNA content (about 50% of controls), but muscle samples showed normal activities of all mitochondrial respiratory chain enzymes. Laboratory studies showed increased lactate beginning at age 12 years in the older brother; serum lactate was normal in the younger brother. There was no biochemical evidence of a peroxisomal defect. Targeted sequencing of a gene panel identified compound heterozygous mutations in the DNM1L gene: S36G (603850.0007) and a truncating mutation (603850.0005). Each unaffected parent carried 1 of the mutations in heterozygous state. Although immunofluorescence studies showed impairment of both mitochondria and peroxisomal dynamics, routine laboratory studies in the patients were not informative for these defects.
**Optic atrophy 5, 610708 (3), AD**
OPA5 is an autosomal dominant form of nonsyndromic optic atrophy, manifest as slowly progressive visual loss with variable onset from the first to third decades. Additional ocular abnormalities may include central scotoma and color vision defects. The pathogenesis is related to defective mitochondrial fission (summary by Gerber et al., 2017).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of optic atrophy, see OPA1 (165500).
Barbet et al. (2005) described 2 unrelated 3-generation French families (families A and B) with autosomal dominant optic atrophy. Although the age of onset was in the first decade in one family and in the third decade in the other, the phenotype was similar in both families and resembled that of patients with mutations in the OPA1 gene. All of the examined patients had optic nerve pallor. Visual acuity decreased slowly, perhaps related to a central scotoma. Color vision was moderately impaired, varying from normal to blue-yellow dyschromatopsia; after several years of evolution, patients showed a severe dyschromatopsia without axis. Electroretinogram recordings were normal, but visual evoked potential recordings were moderately altered in the early stages and severely impaired in the later stages.
Gerber et al. (2017) reported a large multigenerational French family (family 1) in which 8 individuals, 5 of whom were still living, had nonsyndromic optic atrophy. Four patients from 2 generations were examined; they were 10, 14, 40, and 49 years of age. The youngest patient was asymptomatic, the 14 year-old had moderate photophobia, and the older patients had decreased visual acuity beginning at 35 and 45 years, respectively. However, all had abnormalities on detailed eye studies, including narrowing of the visual fields. Three patients had central scotoma, and 2 had moderate color vision defects. All had temporal pallor of the optic discs, and a reduction of retinal nerve fiber layer thickness around the optic nerve head. Visual evoked potentials were moderately to severely impaired. One individual had moderate hearing loss, but otherwise, none had additional neurologic findings. Gerber et al. (2017) reported follow-up of the families reported by Barbet et al. (2005): family A was referred to as family 2, and family B was referred to as family 3. The phenotype of these patients had not changed significantly from the original report.



HERC2
**Mental retardation, autosomal recessive 38, 615516 (3), AR**
Puffenberger et al. (2012) reported 7 patients of Amish or mixed Amish/Mennonite descent with global developmental delay affecting motor, speech, adaptive, and social development. Four had hypotonia and poor suck during infancy, and most had an unstable gait. All patients had behavioral abnormalities, including autistic features, aggression, self-injury, impulsivity, and distractibility. The only distinctive physical characteristic was blue irides. Puffenberger et al. (2012) noted some phenotypic similarities to Angelman syndrome (AS; 105830).
Harlalka et al. (2013) reported 15 additional Amish individuals, aged 11 months to 39 years, with this severe neurodevelopmental disorder. Features included global developmental delay, hypotonia, delayed walking with an unstable gait, absent or poor speech, and poor concentration with hyperactivity. Subtle dysmorphic features included plagiocephaly, prognathism, narrow palate, elongated hallux, sandal gap, and pronation of the feet. Most affected individuals had bright blue eyes. Four patients had seizures, and 3 of 6 who underwent brain imaging showed absence of the posterior half of the corpus callosum.
**[Skin/hair/eye pigmentation 1, blue/nonblue eyes], 227220 (3), AR**
Genetic Heterogeneity of Variation in Skin/Hair/Eye Pigmentation
Multiple genes influence normal human skin, hair, and/or eye pigmentation. Pigmentation phenotypes influenced by variation in the OCA2 gene are termed SHEP1. The SHEP2 association (266300) is determined by variation at the MC1R locus (155555) and describes a phenotype predominantly characterized by red hair and fair skin. SHEP3 (601800) encompasses pigment variation influenced by the TYR gene (606933); SHEP4 (113750), that influenced by the SLC24A5 gene (609802). Variation in the SLC45A2 (606202) and SLC24A4 (609840) genes result in the phenotypic associations SHEP5 (227240) and SHEP6 (210750), respectively. Sequence variation thought to affect expression of KITLG (184745) results in the SHEP7 (611664) phenotypic association. SHEP8 (611724) is associated with variation in the IRF4 gene (601900). Polymorphism in the 3-prime untranslated region of the ASIP gene (600201) influences the SHEP9 association (611742). The SHEP10 association (612267) comprises variation in the TPCN2 gene (612163), and SHEP11 (612271) is associated with polymorphism near the TYRP1 gene (115501).
Pigmentation of hair, eye, and skin is among the most visible examples of human phenotypic variation, with a broad normal range that is subject to substantial geographic stratification. Pigmentation in human tissues is attributable to the number, type, and cellular distribution of melanosomes (subcellular compartments produced by melanocytes that synthesize and store the light-absorbing polymer melanin) (Sulem et al., 2007). Variation in pigmentation among individuals is thought to be caused by biochemical differences that affect the number of melanosomes produced, the type of melanin synthesized (either black-brown eumelanin or red-yellow pheomelanin), and the size and shape of the melanosomes. The key physiologic role of skin pigmentation seems to be to absorb ultraviolet radiation (UVR). This protective role must be weighted against the reduced amount of UVR available for the synthesis of vitamin D3. It is generally believed that the geographic distribution of human skin pigmentation reflects a history of adaptation to latitude-dependent levels of UVR, with individuals tending to have lighter pigmentation with increasing distance from the equator (Relethford, 1997). The majority of variation in human eye and hair color is found among individuals of European ancestry, with most other human populations fixed for brown eyes and black hair (Sulem et al., 2007). Stokowski et al. (2007) cited studies suggesting that the genetic factors influencing lighter pigmentation in Europeans may be far different from the mechanism for lighter pigmentation in East Asians (Relethford, 1997; Norton et al., 2006; Myles et al., 2007). Given the direct correlation between skin pigmentation and incident UV exposure, it has long been postulated that it is a trait under intense selective pressure (Stokowski et al., 2007). Pigmentary mutants in model organisms and human disorders of pigmentation have been the main source for the discovery of genes involved in skin color. More than 100 pigmentation genes have been identified in mouse alone, most with identified human orthologs, and at least 18 genes had been implicated in human albinism.



TRPM7
**{Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-parkinsonism/dementia complex, susceptibility to}, 105500 (3), AD**
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-parkinsonism/dementia complex of Guam is a neurodegenerative disorder with unusually high incidence among the Chamorro people of Guam. Both ALS and parkinsonism-dementia are chronic, progressive, and uniformly fatal disorders in this population. Both diseases are known to occur in the same kindred, the same sibship, and even the same individual.



HOMER2
**?Deafness, autosomal dominant 68, 616707 (3), AD**
Azaiez et al. (2015) studied a multigenerational kindred of European descent segregating autosomal dominant deafness. Pure tone audiometric evaluation of affected individuals revealed postlingual progressive bilateral hearing loss; bone conduction thresholds excluded conductive hearing impairment. Onset of hearing loss typically occurred in the first decade of life and involved the high frequencies; there was significant subsequent progression of hearing loss over all frequencies, with an annual threshold deterioration of 1.2 to 1.6 dB per year. No syndromic features or autoimmune phenotypes were found on clinical examination.
Lu et al. (2018) described a 4-generation Chinese family in which 8 members were diagnosed with severe to profound sensorineural hearing loss by pure tone audiometry. Onset of hearing impairment was in the first to second decade of life with subsequent significant progression. The annual threshold deterioration was 0.529 to 1 dB per year. Some affected members had tinnitus. None complained of any vestibular symptoms.



AGBL1
**Corneal dystrophy, Fuchs endothelial, 8, 615523 (3), AD**
Fuchs endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) is the most common genetic disorder of the corneal endothelium. Late-onset FECD is marked by thickening of Descemets membrane and excrescences, called guttae, that typically appear in the fourth or fifth decade. Disease progression results in decreased visual acuity as a result of increasing corneal edema, and end-stage disease is marked by painful epithelial bullae (summary by Riazuddin et al., 2013).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of FECD, see FECD1 (136800).
Riazuddin et al. (2013) studied a large 3-generation family in which 12 members, the majority of whom were in the sixth or seventh decade of life, fulfilled the phenotypic criteria for Fuchs corneal dystrophy but exhibited variable severity.



ALDOA
**Glycogen storage disease XII, 611881 (3), AR**
Aldolase A deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder associated with hereditary hemolytic anemia (Kishi et al., 1987).
Beutler et al. (1973) described a son of first-cousin parents who had nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia, mental retardation, and increased hepatic glycogen due, apparently, to deficiency of red cell aldolase. Puzzlingly, both parents had normal levels of red cell aldolase. The patient was presented again at the Birth Defects Conference in Vancouver in 1976 (Lowry and Hanson, 1977). He showed many dysmorphic features, some of which (ptosis, epicanthi, short neck, and low posterior hairline) were reminiscent of Noonan syndrome (163950). The patient reported by Beutler et al. (1973) had an unstable enzyme that became depleted in enucleated erythrocytes. Consequently, energy production was impaired and membrane stability decreased with declining ion transport activity. Hurst et al. (1987) described a brother and sister with mental retardation, short stature, delayed puberty, hemolytic anemia, and abnormal facial appearance. The similarities to the boy reported by Beutler et al. (1973) were striking.
Miwa et al. (1981) reported 2 patients with red cell aldolase deficiency associated with congenital nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia. The proband was a 14-month-old Japanese boy whose parents were probably consanguineous. He had mild to moderate anemia that was aggravated by upper respiratory infections, 1 cm hepatomegaly, and 2.5 cm splenomegaly, but showed no growth or mental retardation and did not have dysmorphic features. Red cell aldolase activity was 6% of the normal mean. The enzyme was unstable with respect to heat, and Km for fructose 1,6-diphosphate was high. The parents and other heterozygotes showed intermediate enzyme activity between that of the proband and that of normal subjects. The other affected patient reported by Miwa et al. (1981) was the 13-year-old nephew of the proband's maternal grandmother, and he presented with a phenotype similar to that of the proband.
Kreuder et al. (1996) described a boy with aldolase deficiency who presented with predominantly myopathic symptoms, including muscle weakness and premature muscle fatigue. He had episodes of anemia and jaundice and was prone to episodes of rhabdomyolysis during febrile illness. Biochemical assays revealed a profound reduction in muscle and red cell aldolase levels and a decrease in thermostability of residual enzyme.



CORO1A
**Immunodeficiency 8, 615401 (3), AR**
Shiow et al. (2009) reported a girl with a primary immunodeficiency characterized by early-onset recurrent infections, including oral thrush, and postvaccination varicella at age 13 months. Immunologic workup showed decreased numbers of lymphocytes, poor T-cell function with decreased proliferative response and lack of helper T-cell function for antibody isotype switching, and low immunoglobulins. B and NK cells were normal. Proliferative responses to mitogens were low, and specific antibody titers to tetanus and pneumococcal antigens were low to undetectable despite prior vaccinations. Her thymus was present. She also showed delayed psychomotor development and attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder. Bone marrow transplant was successful.
Moshous et al. (2013) reported 3 sibs, born of consanguineous parents of Moroccan ancestry, who developed an aggressive Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder at ages 12, 7.5, and 14 months, respectively. The proband was the third-born child, a 14-month-old girl who had recurrent upper and lower respiratory infections during the first year of life and was found to have diffuse lymphadenopathy associated with significant CD4+ lymphopenia. Lymph node biopsy was positive for EBV, consistent with a diagnosis of EBV-induced B-cell lymphoproliferative syndrome. She was treated with chemotherapy, but died of complications 4 months after bone marrow transplantation. Family history revealed 2 affected older sibs who presented with B-cell lymphoma, which was retrospectively diagnosed as EBV-induced B-cell lymphoproliferation. One child died in infancy during induction chemotherapy, and the other underwent successful chemotherapy. At the time of the report, the surviving child was 11.5 years old and in remission, but with neurocognitive impairment and behavioral dysfunction, particularly attention deficit and hyperactivity. Lymph node biopsies from all 3 patients showed EBV infection. Detailed immunologic workup showed generalized lymphopenia, severe CD4+ T-cell lymphopenia, and significantly reduced numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ naive T cells, consistent with a primary immunodeficiency. One patient had decreased numbers of invariant natural killer T and mucosal-associated invariant T cells. T-cell proliferative responses were normal in 1 patient, but lower than normal in another, and immunoglobulin levels were essentially normal. There was a bias in the TCR repertoire, indicating expansion of a limited number of T-cell clones. Postvaccination antibodies levels were protective for some antigens, but decreased for others. Immunoglobulin substitution resulted in clinical improvement in the surviving child. All patients had a normal thymus.
Stray-Pedersen et al. (2014) reported 2 sibs from Louisiana, born of unrelated parents, with relatively late onset of IMD8. After normal early development, the proband presented at age 7 years with severely disfiguring granulomatous tuberculoid leprosy. A few years later, she developed disseminated cutaneous epidermodysplasia verruciformis-human papilloma virus (EV-HPV) and oral-cutaneous herpetic ulcers. At age 15, she developed Hodgkin and then non-Hodgkin lymphoma associated with EBV, resulting in death at age 16. Her younger brother also presented at age 7 with EV-HPV and molluscum contagiosum. He had seizures and anemia associated with parvovirus B19 infection and was found to have shortened telomeres (below the first percentile). Both patients had recurrent sinopulmonary infections and bronchiectasis; neither patient had fungal infections. Immunologic work-up over the course of the disease in both patients showed moderate lymphopenia, mildly low CD3+/CD4+ absolute T cells, nearly absent naive CD4CD45RA+ T cells, a preponderance of double-negative CD3+/CD4-/CD8- gamma-delta T cells, undetectable memory B cells, low NK cells, and modestly suppressed mitogen-induced lymphoproliferation. Both patients had increased IgE; the sister had decreased IgA and IgG. Thymus was present in both patients. However, antigen-induced lymphoproliferation in response to tetanus and candida was present. The parents had no clinical disease, but laboratory studies showed low NK cells in the mother and low CD4+ T cells in the father.



KIF22
**Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with joint laxity, type 2, 603546 (3), AD**
Spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with joint laxity type 2 (SEMDJL2) is characterized by short stature, distinctive midface retrusion, progressive knee malalignment (genu valgum and/or varum), generalized ligamentous laxity, and mild spinal deformity. Intellectual development is not impaired. Radiographic characteristics include significantly retarded epiphyseal ossification that evolves into epiphyseal dysplasia and precocious osteoarthritis, metaphyseal irregularities and vertical striations, constricted femoral neck, slender metacarpals and metatarsals, and mild thoracolumbar kyphosis or scoliosis with normal or mild platyspondyly (summary by Min et al., 2011).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of SEMD with joint laxity, see SEMDJL1 (271640).
Hall et al. (1998) described 3 children from unrelated families who presented in infancy with hip dislocation and joint laxity and developed progressive deformity, particularly involving the knees, spine, and hips. Clinically, the facial appearance was normal in 2 of the 3 cases; in the third case, there was mild midface hypoplasia. Cleft palate and ocular or auditory abnormalities were not present. Cognitive development was normal. Height measurements were available for only 1 individual, who was below the 3rd centile at age 5.5 years. Radiographically, the epiphyses were small, flattened, irregular, and fragmented. The metaphyses showed widening, irregularity, and streaky sclerosis. The dorsal vertebral bodies showed posterior decrease in height with scalloping of the posterior aspects of the lumbar vertebral bodies, vertebral endplate irregularity, and progressive chordal narrowing of the interpedicular distances. Scoliosis was not present at birth, but developed in the first years of life. Hall et al. (1998) regarded the hand changes as being particularly characteristic. The metacarpals were gracile, the phalanges were long and slender with squared ends, and the distal phalangeal tufts were prominent. Carpal bones were individually small, irregular, and flattened, and the overall size of the carpals was reduced. There was gross delay in the appearance of the phalangeal epiphyses. All 3 cases showed absent or severely delayed ossification of the patellae.
Hall et al. (1998) noted that 2 cases with virtually identical findings, one reported by Camera et al. (1994) and one (case 5) by Langer et al. (1997), had been considered examples of sponastrime dysplasia (271510). Hall et al. (1998) argued, however, that the striking epiphyseal changes, specific hand findings, and joint laxity with dislocations, in addition to narrow interpedicular distances and posterior scalloping of the vertebrae, allowed differentiation of this condition from sponastrime dysplasia. Hall et al. (1998) also differentiated this condition from the form of spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with joint laxity described by Beighton and Kozlowski (1980) (SEMDJL1; 271640), since SEMDJL1 is associated with kyphoscoliosis at birth, progressing to severe deformity and talipes equinovarus, cleft palate, congenital heart disease, and a specific facial dysmorphism. In addition, the particular radiographic findings in the spine and hands described by Hall et al. (1998) are absent in SEMDJL1.
Hall et al. (2002) reported 3 additional patients with spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with multiple dislocations, including a father with mild manifestations and his daughter who was severely affected. All of the patients showed facial dysmorphism with a short, broad, upturned nose. There were striking epiphyseal and metaphyseal changes of the long bones and joint laxity with multiple dislocations of the large joints, which were particularly incapacitating at the knees.
Megarbane et al. (2003) reported a 6-year-old male with congenital hip dislocation, short stature, macrocephaly, low-set ears, short neck, and hyperlaxity of the wrists and fingers. A broad thorax and limitation of extension of the elbow were seen. X-rays showed severe delay of ossification of the epiphyses and carpal bones and a generalized osteoporosis. There was thoracic scoliosis, mild changes of vertebral endplates, right hip dislocation, and subluxation of the elbows. The epiphyses were small, flattened, and irregular. The femoral neck was slender with flattened femoral epiphyses. Metaphyses of the knees were irregular, squared with vertical striations. Tarsal bones were normally ossified. Delay in early development was noted in this case, as in those reported by Camera et al. (1994) and Hall et al. (2002). Macrocephaly, frontal bossing, midface hypoplasia with saddle-nose, low-set ears, and short neck were thought to be common findings.
Holder-Espinasse et al. (2004) reported a patient with a mild form of spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with persistent inspiratory stridor secondary to laryngeal stenosis.
Nishimura et al. (2003) described 4 patients with spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with multiple dislocations, 2 of whom had previously been diagnosed with sponastrime dysplasia by Masuno et al. (1996) and Nishimura et al. (1998). Clinical findings included midface hypoplasia, micromelic short stature, and generalized joint laxity leading to thoracolumbar scoliosis and multiple joint subluxations. Laryngotracheomalacia was present in 2 patients, an increased serum creatine kinase with transient, mild muscle weakness was noted in another, and pronounced developmental delay was present in 1 patient. Radiologic findings included mild platyspondyly and stellar ossification of the calcaneus (both notable in infancy), narrow interpediculate distances and posterior scalloping of the lumbar spine, constriction of the femoral neck, delayed epiphyseal ossification that evolved to epiphyseal dysplasia and degenerative joint disease, metaphyseal irregularities and striations, and slender, short tubular bones of the hands.
Rossi et al. (2005) reported a father and son with the Hall type of spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with multiple dislocations. The father had short stature and marked joint laxity, including multiple severe joint dislocations. The son had a milder phenotype.
Park et al. (2007) reported a mother and son with the Hall type of SEMD. The son had persistent inspiratory stridor beginning at 4 months of age. Microlaryngoscopy at 22 months revealed laryngeal stenosis secondary to failure of abduction of the vocal cords. A tracheostomy was performed to provide an adequate airway. Park et al. (2007) noted that 5 of the 13 published cases of Hall-type SEMD had upper airway obstruction. They suggested that this is a clinically important diagnostic feature of the disorder.
Kim et al. (2009) reported the clinical and radiologic findings in a Korean mother, daughter, and son with Hall-type SEMDJL and in 3 unrelated Korean patients and 1 Japanese patient. The major clinical features were short stature, midface hypoplasia, and multiple dislocations and/or ligamentous laxity of the large joints, particularly at the knees with genu valgum or varum deformity. One patient had mild mental retardation. No cleft palate was found, and there were no neurologic, ophthalmologic, or auditory abnormalities. One patient had undergone surgical correction of an atrial septal defect, and another had a tracheostomy for tracheomalacia. The main radiologic features included small, irregular epiphyses, metaphyseal irregularity with vertical striations that was a consistent finding at the knees, constricted femoral necks, delayed ossification of the carpal bones, and slender metacarpals. Progressive thoracolumbar scoliosis was evident with aging; however, the vertebral bodies appeared normal in height or showed mild platyspondyly. Kim et al. (2009) stated that the slender appearance of the metacarpals ('leptodactyly') is distinctive enough for a definitive diagnosis.
Boyden et al. (2011) stated that the most distinctive features of leptodactylic SEMD are the slender metacarpals and phalanges and the progressive degeneration of carpal bones; however, these 2 features are evident only in older children and young adults. The soft consistency of cartilage in the airways leads to laryngotracheomalacia with proneness to respiratory obstruction and inspiratory stridor in infancy and childhood.



MVP
**Mitral valve prolapse, myxomatous 1, 157700 (2), AD**
Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) has a prevalence of approximately 2 to 3% in the general population. It is characterized by fibromyxomatous changes in mitral leaflet tissue, with upward displacement of 1 or both leaflets into the left atrium during systole; MVP is diagnosed when the movement of the mitral leaflets exceeds 2 mm. In classic MVP, leaflets are at least 5 mm thick, whereas in nonclassic MVP, they are less than 5 mm thick. Auscultatory findings, when present, consist of a midsystolic click and/or a late systolic murmur. The natural history of MVP varies from benign, with a normal life expectancy, to severe complications associated with the development of significant mitral regurgitation, including congestive heart failure, bacterial endocarditis, atrial fibrillation, thromboembolism, and even sudden death. However, complications are uncommon, affecting less than 3% of individuals with MVP (Freed et al., 1999; Grau et al., 2007; Delling and Vasan, 2014).
Grau et al. (2007) provided a detailed review of the genetics of mitral valve prolapse. Delling and Vasan (2014) reviewed the epidemiology and pathophysiology of MVP, with discussion of disease progression, genetics, and molecular basis.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Familial Mitral Valve Prolapse
The locus for MVP1 has been mapped to chromosome 16p; the locus for MVP2 (607829) has been mapped to chromosome 11p.
Mitral valve prolapse-3 (MVP3; 610840) is caused by mutation in the DZIP1 gene (608671) on chromosome 13q32.
Prolapse or buckling of one or both of the mitral leaflets into the left atrium during systole is common, occurring in 4 to 8% of young adults and more often in females than in males (Procacci et al., 1976; Darsee et al., 1979; Sbarbaro et al., 1979). The auscultatory findings are a midsystolic, nonejection click, a holo- or late-systolic mitral regurgitation murmur, or both; about 20% have 'silent' prolapse. M-mode and particularly cross-sectional echocardiography are sensitive, noninvasive methods of detecting the abnormal valve motion. Fibromyxomatous degeneration is generally found on histopathologic examination. In functional terms, mitral valve prolapse results from a valve-ventricle mismatch. Hutchins et al. (1986) pointed out that the fundamental fault is often not in the valve leaflets, but in the mitral annulus which is stretched with resulting disjunction between the atrium and ventricle. Because many abnormalities of the left ventricle or mitral valve apparatus can lead to prolapse, a wide range of etiologic and pathogenetic heterogeneity exists. Thus, MVP is associated with coronary artery disease, congestive or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, atrial septal defect, papillary muscle or chorda tendinea rupture, and various heritable disorders of connective tissue (Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and osteogenesis imperfecta). Most persons with MVP have none of these conditions and their MVP has been called idiopathic. Many such persons have chest pain, dyspnea, thoracic cage deformity (Bon Tempo et al., 1975; Salomon et al., 1975), dysrhythmia (Gooch et al., 1972), and distinctive anthropomorphic characteristics (Schutte et al., 1981) which suggest a syndrome. In some cases, a modicum of loose-jointedness may suggest a mild form of the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
Roberts (2005) noted a reported prevalence of 2.4% for MVP, based primarily on studies in European and North American populations.
Familial occurrence of MVP, often with associated features, was noted in early reports (Barlow and Bosman, 1966; Hunt and Sloman, 1969; Stannard et al., 1967; Shell et al., 1969). Some instances of panic attacks (neurocirculatory asthenia) reported in families represented MVP in all likelihood (Cohen et al., 1951). Screening pedigrees for MVP after relatively unbiased ascertainment of the proband has supported autosomal dominant inheritance in a high proportion of idiopathic MVP (Weiss et al., 1975; Fortuin et al., 1977; Devereux et al., 1982). Devereux et al. (1982) examined 45 probands and 179 first-degree relatives and found at least one relative affected by MVP in 29 families. Expression was age- and sex-dependent, with MVP more commonly found in young adult females than in children, the elderly, or men of any age. Except for anthropomorphic characteristics of narrower A-P chest diameter and longer arm spans than controls (Schutte et al., 1981), none of the other associated (perhaps pleiotropic) features of MVP syndrome have been demonstrated to follow dominant inheritance. The extent of genetic heterogeneity is also unclear. Nonetheless, MVP appears to be the most common mendelian cardiovascular abnormality in humans. The condition is usually benign and nonprogressive, although chordal rupture, bacterial endocarditis and sudden death occur, and myxomatous degeneration/MVP is the most common cause of severe, isolated mitral regurgitation in adults. No prospective, unbiased study of natural history has been performed, but prognosis in idiopathic MVP appears to be far better than for MVP in the Marfan syndrome, in which over 12% of patients developed progressive severe mitral regurgitation by age 22 years (Pyeritz and Woppel, 1982). Malcolm (1985) gave an exhaustive review.
Rogan et al. (1989) described a family in which multiple members developed severe atrioventricular valvular regurgitation and at least 1 also had aortic regurgitation. Myxomatous proliferation in heart valves was demonstrated in all cases. The proband was a 23-year-old asymptomatic soldier who was found to have a systolic murmur on routine physical examination; echocardiography showed a calcified mass in the left ventricular outflow tract. Rogan et al. (1989) suggested the designation 'familial myxomatous valvular disease.' The patient also showed 'soft' connective tissue signs, mild dolichostenomelia (arm span 7 cm greater than height), a highly arched palate, reversal of the usual vertebral column curves, mild pectus excavatum, and marked striae atrophica over his lower back and hips.
James et al. (2003) described a family in which 8 individuals in 4 generations were affected by a dominantly inherited disorder involving MVP, short stature, dolichocephalic face, broad forehead, posteriorly angulated ears, long philtrum, thin upper lip, high arched palate, and small mandible. The proband presented at age 8 years with infective mastoiditis, bacterial endocarditis, and supraventricular tachycardia. One other family member also had infective mastoiditis and bacterial endocarditis, and both the proband's mother and grandmother died suddenly at the ages of 30 and 25 years, respectively. The occurrence of infective mastoiditis in 2 members of this family was thought to be related to abnormal development of the temporal bone, which may have contributed to the distinctive facial appearance of the affected individuals. This family was thought to most closely resemble that reported by Collins et al. (1990): a mother and her 2 daughters had MVP associated with short stature, disproportionately short limbs, and small hands. The growth retardation was more severe than that in the family reported by James et al. (2003), with the 2 adults reported as having heights of 147 and 140 cm. Valvular heart disease included both MVP and pulmonary stenosis.
Digilio et al. (2004) evaluated a mother and daughter with a constellation of anomalies similar to those reported by James et al. (2003) and Collins et al. (1990). The proband was a 14-year-old female with thin body habitus, long face, upslanting palpebral fissures, beaked nose and nasal septum below alae, short philtrum, high-arched palate, and crowded teeth. Height was 140 cm (below 3rd centile). Developmental milestones were mildly retarded and a mild cognitive deficit with learning difficulties was present. Echocardiography showed polyvalvular disease, with quadricuspid aortic valve with mild regurgitation and prolapse of the mitral and tricuspid valves with mild regurgitation. The mother had thin body habitus with marked short stature (height 139 cm; below 3rd centile). She had moderate mental retardation. Echocardiography showed thickening of the aortic valve leaflets without regurgitation or stenosis, and mitral and tricuspid valve prolapse with mild regurgitation. Skeletal x-rays showed no abnormalities.



PRRT2
**Convulsions, familial infantile, with paroxysmal choreoathetosis, 602066 (3), AD**
Benign familial infantile convulsions (BFIC; see 601764) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by afebrile seizures occurring between 3 and 12 months of age. Paroxysmal choreoathetosis is a disorder of involuntary movements characterized by attacks that occur spontaneously or are induced by a variety of stimuli.
The ICCA syndrome shares overlapping clinical features with benign familial infantile seizures-2 (BFIS2; 605751) and episodic kinesigenic dyskinesia-1 (EKD1; 128200), which are allelic disorders.
See also rolandic epilepsy with paroxysmal exercise-induced dystonia and writer's cramp (608105), which maps to 16p.
Szepetowski et al. (1997) studied 4 families from northwestern France in which benign infantile convulsions was inherited as an autosomal dominant trait together with variably expressed paroxysmal choreoathetosis. The authors suggested that the strong association of the 2 disorders in the same families defined a distinct neurologic syndrome. Partial seizures started with a psychomotor arrest and a deviation of the head and eyes to one side, often with secondary generalization. The seizures responded well to medication and remitted by age 12 months. Paroxysmal choreoathetotic movements were of the dystonic type and occurred at rest or in response to exertion or anxiety. Both seizures and movements occurred in clusters. Interictal EEGs were normal, and all patients showed normal psychomotor development.
Swoboda et al. (2000) reported 44 individuals from 11 families with infantile convulsions (62% of patients), PKC (86%), or both (50%). Infantile convulsions were common, occurring in 9 of 11 families, and were characterized by onset between 3 and 18 months of age, eye deviation, staring, altered consciousness, apnea, and tonic stiffening. Remission occurred within 3 years. Age at onset for PKC was 6 to 28 years. Episodes were provoked by anxiety or exertion. EEG studies were normal in all patients except one.
**Episodic kinesigenic dyskinesia 1, 128200 (3), AD**
Paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis (PKC) is an autosomal dominant neurologic condition characterized by recurrent and brief attacks of involuntary movement triggered by sudden voluntary movement. These attacks usually have onset during childhood or early adulthood and can involve dystonic postures, chorea, or athetosis. Symptoms become less severe with age and show favorable response to anticonvulsant medications such as carbamazepine or phenytoin. It is the most common type of paroxysmal movement disorder. The condition is often misdiagnosed as an epileptic manifestation (summary by Chen et al., 2011).
PKC shares some clinical features with benign familial infantile convulsions (BFIC2; 605751) and infantile convulsions and paroxysmal choreoathetosis (ICCA; 602066), which are allelic disorders.
See also rolandic epilepsy with paroxysmal exercise-induced dystonia and writer's cramp (608105), which maps to chromosome 16p12-p11.2.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Episodic Kinesigenic Dyskinesia
See also EKD2 (611031), which maps to chromosome 16q13-q22.1.
Familial paroxysmal dystonia was reported as a 'pure entity' in mother and 3 sons by Weber (1967). He claimed that only 1 family had previously been reported (Lance, 1963) and that the disorder is distinct from familial paroxysmal choreoathetosis (see PNKD1, 118800). It may be the same as the periodic dystonia reported by Smith and Heersema (1941) in which 3 unrelated sibships of Polish and Lithuanian extraction demonstrated episodic dystonic movements of 5 to 10 seconds duration induced by movement. Kertesz (1967) called the condition paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis.
Goodenough et al. (1978) divided familial paroxysmal dyskinesias into kinesigenic and nonkinesigenic forms according to whether or not paroxysms are precipitated by sudden movements. The kinesigenic form differs from the nonkinesigenic form by later onset in many cases, briefer duration of attacks (seconds to minutes) which usually occur daily, and good response to anticonvulsants. Goodenough et al. (1978) pointed out that there are also acquired forms of paroxysmal dyskinesias, e.g., with multiple sclerosis, cerebral palsy or idiopathic hypoparathyroidism.
The family first reported by Mount and Reback (1940) is an example of familial nonkinesigenic paroxysmal dyskinesia. In the familial nonkinesigenic form, the movements are of longer duration, occur less frequently, and rarely respond to anticonvulsants.
So-called incompletely atonic attacks of PKC appear to be especially frequent in Japanese. Fukuda et al. (1999) described this form in a woman, her brother, and their mother. The woman first presented at the age of 22 years with attacks of muscle weakness mainly in her limbs. The attacks of muscle weakness resembled the choreoathetotic attacks that occur in PKC in terms of their kinesigenicity and duration, clarity of consciousness during the attacks, good therapeutic response to low doses of phenytoin, and familial transmission. All 3 individuals reported by Fukuda et al. (1999) had hypercalcitoninemia which was unexplained. They were not thought to have multiple endocrine neoplasia type IIA (MEN2; 171400) or IIB (MEN2B; 162300), both of which are associated with hypercalcitoninemia.
Sadamatsu et al. (1999) performed video-monitoring EEG in 2 patients with PKC during attacks elicited by movements of the lower extremities. Findings strongly suggested that the etiology should be considered distinct from that of reflex epilepsy. However, the patients in this pedigree had experienced generalized convulsions in infancy; thus, Sadamatsu et al. (1999) could not rule out the possibility of an epileptogenic basis for the condition. No evidence for linkage was found with any 1 of 5 candidate regions.
In a comprehensive review of clinical and molecular genetics of primary dystonias, Muller et al. (1998) referred to this disorder as dystonia-10 and pointed to the reports of Kertesz (1967) and Walker (1981) as examples.
In an extensive linkage study of patients with PKC, Tomita et al. (1999) reported that 42% of their patients had afebrile, general convulsions in infancy (see, e.g., BFIC2, 605751).
Spacey et al. (2002) reported a Caucasian English family in which 8 members had either PKC or seizure. Four family members with PKC had attacks that were choreic and lasted less than a minute, and four family members had generalized and/or partial seizures without PKC, including 2 with infantile seizures. There was suggestive linkage to chromosome 16 if the phenotype considered was PKC plus seizures.
Chen et al. (2011) reported 8 unrelated Han Chinese families with EKD1 confirmed by genetic analysis (614386.0001-614386.0003). The transmission pattern in each family was consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance. The proband of 1 family was described in detail. He had onset at age 6 years of dystonic posturing of the head and arm, usually triggered by standing up quickly. This occurred up to 10 times per day, and lasted about 5 to 10 minutes. Brain MRI and EEG were normal at age 9 years. Treatment with carbamazepine resulted in complete symptom resolution.
**Seizures, benign familial infantile, 2, 605751 (3), AD**
Benign familial infantile seizure is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by afebrile partial complex or generalized tonic-clonic seizures occurring between 3 and 12 months of age with a good response to medication and no neurologic sequelae. Seizures usually remit by age 18 months (summary by Weber et al., 2004).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of benign familial infantile seizures, see BFIS1 (601764).
Benign familial infantile seizures can also occur in 2 allelic disorders: infantile convulsions and choreoathetosis (ICCA; 602066) and paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis (EKD1; 128200).
Caraballo et al. (2001) identified and studied 7 families with autosomal dominant BFIS. In 1 family, Caraballo et al. (2001) observed a patient who was clearly homozygous for the BFIS2 gene. Infantile convulsions did not respond well to anticonvulsants, in contrast to all other affected members of his family and to classic BFIS. In addition, although the families had been selected on the basis of clinical evidence of BFIS only, this patient had atypical paroxysmal choreic/dystonic dyskinesia beginning at age 2 years. The age of onset was earlier than that of classic paroxysmal dyskinesias (which usually begins at age 5 to 16 years). Dyskinetic movements sometimes occurred a few seconds after starting exertion, which suggested a kinesigenic type. However, the patient did not respond to carbamazepine, a finding that is consistent with an exertional rather than a kinesigenic type.
Weber et al. (2004) reported 14 families with BFIS2 showing linkage to chromosome 16p12-q12. Onset of seizures occurred between 2 and 7 months of age and disappeared at the latest by age 18 months. Seizure types included complex partial seizures and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Other features included loss of consciousness, paleness, cyanosis, hypotonia, gaze deviation, and focal clonicity. Medication was effective, and could be stopped by age 4 years without seizure relapse. Most interictal EEG did not show abnormalities, but some had focal seizure activity.
Schubert et al. (2012) reported 39 families with BFIS2. The phenotype was homogeneous, with an onset of seizures between 3 and 12 months of age and a benign outcome in almost all cases without long-term anticonvulsive treatment. Seizure types mainly included complex partial seizures and generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Some patients reported migraine, but none had febrile seizures, choreoathetosis, or dyskinesia. Some of the families had previously been reported by Striano et al. (2006) and Weber et al. (2004).



SPN
**?Dyskinesia, seizures, and intellectual developmental disorder, 617171 (3), AR**
Neurodevelopmental disorder with hypotonia and impaired expressive language and with or without seizures (NEDHELS) is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by hypotonia, poor feeding, and global developmental delay apparent from infancy. Most patients have poor overall growth, poor eye contact, sleep disturbances, and severely impaired expressive language. Affected individuals also tend to have behavioral problems, microcephaly, and variable dysmorphic features; many develop seizures. Brain imaging may show enlarged ventricles, thin corpus callosum and brainstem, and white matter abnormalities. The phenotype is variable (summary by Nabais Sa et al., 2019).
Rajab et al. (2015) reported 3 sibs, born of consanguineous Omani parents, with a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by severely delayed psychomotor development, impaired intellectual development, absence of speech, and hypotonia since infancy. At ages 20, 17, and 4 years, all needed help for basic daily activities. The 2 older sibs developed seizures at age 4 and 2 years, respectively, and one of them had repeated episodes of status epilepticus. The youngest sib did not have seizures at age 4 years, but EEG showed focal epileptic activity. Brain imaging of the 2 older patients showed bilateral T2-weighted hyperintensities in the putamen without leukodystrophic changes or abnormal gyration. The patients also had behavioral abnormalities, including autistic features, mood swings, agitation, and aggression, as well as features reminiscent of Rett syndrome (312750), such as involuntary body and facial movements, drooling, and sleep disturbances.
Faqeih et al. (2014) reported 2 male first cousins, both about 2 years of age and born from a consanguineous Saudi family, with hypotonia, feeding difficulties, and poor growth apparent from infancy. They had global developmental delay, severely impaired intellectual development, speech delay, and microcephaly. One patient developed early-onset seizures. Brain imaging in both patients showed deep white matter abnormalities, delayed myelination, and a possibly abnormal gyral pattern. One of the cousins had a similarly affected sister who died at age 3.
Gund et al. (2016) reported a 14-year-old boy, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, who presented with hypotonia and developmental delay in the first months of life. At age 14, he could sit unsupported and stand with support, but was unable to feed himself and had no expressive speech. He had behavioral abnormalities, including repetitive and self-injurious behavior, and mild dysmorphic features, including low-set hairline, triangular face, and high-arched palate. He had onset of generalized tonic-clonic seizures around 14.5 years of age; EEG showed multifocal sharp waves. Brain imaging showed thin corpus callosum and diffuse volume loss of the brainstem, which may suggest myelination defects, but no white matter abnormalities were present. He had brisk deep tendon reflexes, but did not have spasticity. A similarly affected brother died at age 10 due to an accident. The parents were unaffected.
Nabais Sa et al. (2019) reported 5 patients, ranging in age from 2 to 17 years, from 4 unrelated families with global developmental delay, poor or absent speech, and variably impaired intellectual development. Four patients showed developmental regression. Two patients had delayed walking by age 18 months, whereas 3 did not achieve walking, including 2 who were wheelchair-bound. About two-thirds of patients had behavioral abnormalities, including autism, mood swings, fascinations, and aggressive behavior. A 17-year-old patient (patient 1) had no expressive speech, but was able to communicate with supportive typing and could attend school. Only 1 patient had dystonia with poor motor coordination. Four patients had onset of various seizure types in the first years of life, although most were controlled with valproic acid. Brain imaging showed abnormalities in 4 patients, including enlarged ventricles, hypoplasia of the posterior part of the corpus callosum, and nonspecific white matter anomalies. Other features included hypotonia, sleep disturbances, poor eye contact, feeding difficulties, and constipation. Some patients had nonspecific dysmorphic features, including horizontal eyebrows, strabismus, broad nasal tip, cupid's bow, thick lower lip, and pointed chin. Three patients had microcephaly. All parents were unaffected.
Andoni et al. (2020) reported 2 male first cousins from a consanguineous Pakistani family with NEDHELS. Both pregnancies were complicated by polyhydramnios, and the patients presented soon after birth with hypotonia, microcephaly, feeding difficulties, and developmental delay. Both had neonatal respiratory distress associated with esophageal atresia or laryngomalacia. Dysmorphic facial features included brachycephaly, low anterior hairline, mild hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, low-set ears, tented upper lip, high-arched palate, and upturned nasal tip. At age 13 years, 1 patient was unable to walk, had poor visual fixation and no speech, was tube-fed, and was fully dependent for all care. Brain imaging showed loss of white matter, enlarged ventricles, thin corpus callosum, and small brainstem. Both patients also had tapered digits, cryptorchidism, and micropenis. Neither had seizures or spasticity. The parents were unaffected.
Sumathipala et al. (2020) reported a 6-year-old girl, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, with NEHELS. She was born at 32 weeks' gestation due to placental abruption and showed a clenched hand with thumb adduction at birth. At age 4 months, she had hypotonia, adduction and scissoring of the lower legs, poor head control, absent eye contact, lack of social smiling, and severe global developmental delay. She also had sleep problems, truncal ataxia, gait apraxia, severely impaired intellectual development with absent language, and behavioral anomalies, including stereotypic movements and self-injury. There were mild pyramidal tract signs, such as inversion of the plantar reflexes, although reflexes were diminished. Other features included microcephaly, dysphagia, gastroesophageal reflux, and recurrent infections. Brain imaging showed agenesis of the splenium of the corpus callosum and delayed myelination, but no apparent white matter abnormalities. Dysmorphic features included broad forehead, synophrys, long eyelashes, and thick lower lip with prominent chin. She did not have overt seizures, although there were some EEG abnormalities.
**Mental retardation, autosomal dominant 24, 615828 (3), AD**
Vulto-van Silfout-de Vries syndrome (VSVS) is an intellectual developmental disorder characterized by delayed psychomotor development, poor expressive speech, and behavioral abnormalities, including autistic features and poor eye contact. Most patients have additional nonspecific features, including hypotonia and gait abnormalities, seizures, which may be refractory, high pain threshold, and sleep disturbances (summary by Nabais Sa et al., 2019).
Vulto-van Silfhout et al. (2014) reported 4 unrelated children with VSVS, including 2 patients previously identified by Vissers et al. (2010) and Rauch et al. (2012). All patients had delayed psychomotor development with absent or very poor expressive speech and gait abnormalities. Three had poor eye contact. Dysmorphic features were mild, but included thin and/or fair hair, straight eyebrows, full nasal tip, tented upper lip, full lower lip, and prominent chin. Three patients had skin syndactyly of toes 2-3, 2 had a sacral dimple, and 2 had hyperlaxity. All also had recurrent infections and a high pain threshold. The patients were described as having a happy disposition, but 3 had severe behavioral abnormalities consisting of autistic, compulsive, hyperactive, and aggressive behavior with striking mood swings.
Chen et al. (2017) reported 5 unrelated patients, ranging in age from 3 to 15 years, with VSVS. They had global developmental delay with impaired intellectual development, and poor or absent speech. Most had hypotonia, walking difficulties, and behavioral abnormalities, including autistic features, aggressiveness, and self-injury. All developed seizures. More variable features included mild facial dysmorphism, macrocephaly, gastroesophageal reflux, and recurrent infections.
Nabais Sa et al. (2019) reported 17 unrelated patients, ranging in age from 3 to 38 years, with VSVS. Five patients were above the age of 19. The patients were ascertained through exome, genome, or autism gene panel analysis from 17 medical centers all over the world and collected by the authors through collaborative efforts. All patients had global developmental delay with mildly delayed walking (average 18 months), moderately to severely impaired intellectual development, and delayed speech with poor or absent language (7 patients). However, most were able to communicate with sign language, hand gestures, or pictures, suggesting a specific disturbance in expressive language. Patients tended to have hypotonia and persistent walking difficulties, sometimes with an imbalanced, broad-based, or ataxic gait. None had spasticity, but 1 had dystonia. Eight patients showed some developmental regression, mainly with loss of language skills at an early age. All patients had autism spectrum disorder, and most had poor eye contact and additional behavioral abnormalities, including mood swings with paroxysmal laughter, fascinations, particularly with water, hyperactivity, impulsivity, obsessive traits, and aggressive behavior. Ten patients developed seizures with a highly variable age at onset between 2 days and 16 years; seizure types included absence, motor, focal, multifocal, and generalized tonic-clonic. About half of patients had refractory seizures, whereas the other half showed a partial response to medication. Other common features included sleep disturbances, high pain threshold, prominent fingertip pads, joint hypermobility, and minor limb abnormalities, such as syndactyly. Brain imaging was normal in most, but showed nonspecific abnormalities in 4. Ten patients (63%) had recurrent childhood infections, predominantly chronic ear infections, sinusitis, or upper respiratory tract infections. Gastrointestinal abnormalities were common (75%) and included feeding difficulties, gastroesophageal reflux disease, constipation, and diarrhea. Some had mild nonspecific dysmorphic features, including prominent forehead and macrocephaly.
Sharma et al. (2019) reported a 12-year-old girl with global developmental delay, congenital heart disease, and poor growth. She walked at 1.5 years, started speaking a few words at age 2, and fed herself at 4. She was able to attend a special school and could speak simple sentences; IQ was measured at 57. Nonspecific dysmorphic features included upslanting palpebral fissures, depressed nasal bridge, prominent maxilla, straight eyebrows, full nasal tip, tented upper lip, full lower lip, and prominent chin, low hairline, and short webbed neck. She also had mild distal skeletal anomalies of the hands and feet, including fifth finger hypoplasia, as well as scoliosis. She did not have seizures or spasticity.



TBX6
**Spondylocostal dysostosis 5, 122600 (3), AR, AD**
Rimoin et al. (1968) reported a family in which father and son and probably 2 preceding generations were short of stature (less than 5 feet), the shortening being mainly in the trunk, and had multiple rib and vertebral anomalies. The number of ribs was reduced to 11 and several ribs were fused posteriorly. Hemivertebra and vertebral fusion were noted at multiple levels in the cervical and thoracic spine. No neurologic manifestations were present. Langer (1967) reported another family with multiple affected generations.
Rutt and Degenhardt (1959) described a 4-generation family (Familie Mck.) in which 4 individuals had congenital scoliosis. Van der Sar (1952) found multiple hemivertebrae and rib anomalies in a mother and daughter.
Ayme and Preus (1986) did a cluster analysis on reported cases of spondylocostal dysostosis, spondylothoracic dysplasia, and Jarcho-Levin syndrome. They concluded that the dominant and mild recessive forms of spondylothoracic dysplasia, falling into their cluster 2, could not be distinguished.
The family with affected members in 3 generations reported by Temple et al. (1988) may have had the same condition as that reported by Rimoin et al. (1968) and others. Short stature was striking. The rib changes were only mild.
Lorenz and Rupprecht (1990) reported the cases of a father and daughter. Abnormality of the ribs was more severe in the infant daughter than usual in this form and was suggestive of the changes found in the autosomal recessive type.
Gucev et al. (2010) studied an indigenous 3-generation Macedonian family segregating autosomal dominant spondylocostal dysostosis. The 12-year-old proband and his father and paternal uncle had disproportionately short trunks and necks with a normal range of movement, and radiographs revealed mild scoliosis with a mixture of hemivertebrae and vertebral blocks. The ribs were relatively mildly affected, with nearly normal alignment and a possible point of fusion high on the left posteriorly in the proband and mild thoracic sulci and flaring of the lower rib cage in the father and uncle. There were no other significant organ abnormalities, no obvious dysmorphic features, and neurodevelopment was normal. The paternal grandfather was deceased but was reported to have had the same phenotype.
Wu et al. (2015) reported 23 Han Chinese individuals with a diagnosis of congenital scoliosis that was related to compound heterozygous mutation in the TBX6 gene. All 23 individuals had 1 or more hemivertebrae. The number of hemivertebrae was significantly higher in patients with TBX6-related congenital scoliosis that in those with congenital scoliosis without TBX6 mutation. Rib abnormalities were also reported in most patients.
Liu et al. (2019) studied cohorts of patients with congenital scoliosis (CS), 345 from China (cohort 1), 142 from Japan (cohort 2), and 10 from the United States (cohort 3). Clinically measurable endophenotypes were compared according to the TBX6 genotypes. Liu et al. (2019) developed a clinical diagnostic algorithm (TACScore) to assist in clinical recognition of TBX6-associated CS (TACS). Cohort 1 included 33 TACS patients, and these were significantly younger at onset (median age 2 years) than the remaining CS patients (median age 3 years), presented with 1 or more hemivertebrae/butterfly vertebrae, and exhibited vertebral malformations involving the lower part of the spine (T8-S5); observations were confirmed in Japanese and US cohorts. Simple rib anomalies were prevalent in the TACS patients (present in 25 of 33) whereas intraspinal anomalies were uncommon (present in only 1 patient). A clinically usable TACScore was developed with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.9.
Otomo et al. (2019) described 9 Japanese patients with congenital scoliosis with involvement of cervical thoracic and lumbar vertebral areas. Vertebral anomalies (blocked vertebrae, hemivertebrae, and butterfly vertebrae) were seen in all patients, with 3 patients also having rib anomalies. A Japanese patient with SCOD had multiple defects along the spine and multiple posterior fusions of the ribs.



NUP93
**Nephrotic syndrome, type 12, 616892 (3), AR**
Nephrotic syndrome type 12 is an autosomal recessive renal disorder caused by defects in the renal glomerular filter. Affected individuals have onset of progressive renal failure in the first years of life. Renal biopsy typically shows focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) (summary by Braun et al., 2016).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of nephrotic syndrome, see NPHS1 (256300).
Braun et al. (2016) reported 7 children from 6 unrelated families with steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome. The age at onset ranged from 1 to 6 years and end-stage kidney disease became apparent between 1 and 11 years. Renal biopsy showed focal segmental glomerulosclerosis; diffuse mesangial sclerosis was apparent in 1 family. There was also evidence of a renal tubular phenotype involving proximal tubular dilation with protein casts and interstitial cell infiltrations. Electron microscopy showed partial podocyte foot process effacement. One patient showed partial response to steroids and 2 patients partially responded to cyclosporin A.



HP
**[Hypohaptoglobinemia], 614081 (3)**
Anhaptoglobinemia refers to absence of the serum glycoprotein haptoglobin, a hemoglobin-binding acute-phase protein (summary by Teye et al., 2004). Serum levels of haptoglobin vary among normal persons: levels are low in the neonatal period and in the elderly, differ by population, and can be influenced by environmental factors, such as infection. Secondary hypohaptoglobinemia can occur as a consequence of hemolysis, during which haptoglobin binds to free hemoglobin (summary by Delanghe et al., 1998).
Koda et al. (2000) reported 2 Asian anhaptoglobinemic patients with antihaptoglobin antibodies who developed anaphylactic transfusion reactions.
Teye et al. (2004) stated that anhaptoglobinemia has important clinical consequences, such as protecting against the cattle pathogen Trypanosoma brucei and being associated with higher CD4 cell counts in patients with HIV infection (Quaye et al., 2000).
Acquired Hypo- or Anhaptoglobinemia
Teye et al. (2003) noted that serum levels of haptoglobin can decrease secondarily following hemolysis, as haptoglobin is saturated by free hemoglobin. This is often observed in sub-Saharan African regions where malaria is endemic. In those with low haptoglobin levels at baseline, hemolysis due to malaria can result in clinical anhaptoglobinemia.



ADAMTS18
**Microcornea, myopic chorioretinal atrophy, and telecanthus, 615458 (3), AR**
Khan (2012) described 5 boys, ranging in age from 4 to 10 years at presentation, from 4 unrelated consanguineous Saudi Arabian families with microcornea and myopic chorioretinal atrophy. In addition to ocular findings, all 5 boys had telecanthus and posteriorly rotated ears, which were not present in unaffected parents or sibs and were not normative for the ethnic population. Horizontal corneal diameters ranged from 9.8 to 10.5 mm; anterior chambers were not shallow. Three unrelated boys had severe chorioretinal atrophy, whereas 2 affected brothers had milder disease. Pupillary examination and intraocular pressures were normal for all 5 boys, and no coloboma or other developmental eye disease was detected. In the 2 patients who were old enough to cooperate for electroretinography, there was mild depression and delay in both scotopic and photopic function. Parents did not notice progressive deterioration in vision or significant preference for day or night vision in any of the children. One boy had an affected father, with telecanthus, posteriorly rotated ears, bilateral best-corrected visual acuity of 20/50, horizontal corneal diameters of 10.5 mm, and moderate myopic chorioretinal atrophy bilaterally.
Aldahmesh et al. (2013) studied a 9-year-old girl from a consanguineous family who had microcornea, myopic chorioretinal degeneration, telecanthus, posteriorly rotated ears, and a broad nasal tip. Best corrected visual acuity was 20/50 bilaterally, and horizontal corneal diameters were 9.9 mm and 10.2 mm.



ITGA3
**Interstitial lung disease, nephrotic syndrome, and epidermolysis bullosa, congenital, 614748 (3), AR**
Mutations in the integrin alpha-3 gene are associated with disrupted basement-membrane structures and compromised barrier functions in kidney, lung, and skin. Patients exhibit a multiorgan disorder that includes congenital interstitial lung disease, nephrotic syndrome, and epidermolysis bullosa. The respiratory and renal features predominate, and lung involvement accounts for the lethal course of the disease (summary by Has et al., 2012).
Has et al. (2012) described 3 unrelated children, a boy and 2 girls, who had congenital interstitial lung disease, nephrotic syndrome, and mild epidermolysis bullosa. The index patient was a boy from southern Italy who had respiratory distress at birth requiring high-flow supplemental oxygen; chest x-ray showed severe reticulonodular changes. At 2 weeks of age, he developed renal failure and nephrotic syndrome, and peritoneal dialysis was initiated. From the age of 3 months, the infant had increasing skin fragility, with small blisters and erosions after mechanical manipulation. There was no mucosal involvement. Scalp hair, eyebrows, and eyelashes were fine and sparse. The big toenails became dystrophic, and distal onycholysis followed mild trauma to the fingernails. Renal biopsy at 1 month of age showed globally atrophic glomeruli, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, diffuse interstitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy, and loss and immaturity of the tubules. At 5.5 months, lung biopsy showed hyperinflation and mild to moderate simplification of air spaces and mild reactive changes in the bronchioles. The infant died at 7.5 months during an episode of pulmonary infection. The second patient was a girl born to healthy consanguineous parents from Gaza, the only affected of 9 sibs, who developed respiratory distress at 2 days of life. At 6 weeks of age, chest x-ray showed bilateral infiltrates, and CT findings were consistent with diffuse interstitial lung disease. Laboratory tests showed proteinuria in the nephrotic range, and peritoneal dialysis was begun. The girl died of multiorgan failure at 2 months of age. The third patient was a Pakistani girl, born to healthy consanguineous parents, who developed fever and respiratory distress at 2 months of age; chest x-ray showed changes consistent with right upper and middle lobe pneumonia. Proteinuria in the nephrotic range was noted, and a renal biopsy at 5 months of age showed focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Progressive renal function deterioration required peritoneal dialysis at 17 months of age. She had recurrent respiratory infections and required supplemental oxygen to maintain peripheral saturation above 90%. At 4 months of age, she developed annular erythematous skin lesions that coalesced into blisters that were consistent with epidermolysis bullosa. She died of multiorgan failure at 19 months of age.
Yalcin et al. (2015) reported a male infant, born of consanguineous parents, who presented in the first week of life with respiratory distress and cyanosis in the absence of evidence of infection with microorganisms. Lung imaging was consistent with interstitial lung disease, and biopsy showed abnormal alveolarization and poorly septated alveolar spaces. Laboratory studies showed nephrotic-range proteinuria and hypoalbuminemia associated with crossed fused renal ectopia. The patient had fine sparse scalp hair and dystrophic nails, but no overt clinical skin disease. Skin biopsy showed a junctional split. He died at age 6.5 months of respiratory infection.



TBCD
**Encephalopathy, progressive, early-onset, with brain atrophy and thin corpus callosum, 617193 (3), AR**
PEBAT is an autosomal recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by severely delayed psychomotor development apparent soon after birth or in infancy, profound intellectual disability, poor or absent speech, and seizures. Most patients are never able to walk due to hypotonia or spasticity. Brain imaging shows cerebral and cerebellar atrophy, thin corpus callosum, and secondary hypomyelination. The disorder shows progressive features, including microcephaly, consistent with a neurodegenerative process (summary by Miyake et al., 2016; Flex et al., 2016).
Miyake et al. (2016) reported 8 children from 4 unrelated families with a severe early-onset neurodegenerative encephalopathy. Four patients from 2 unrelated nonconsanguineous Japanese families presented at birth or in the first weeks of life with severe hypotonia and almost no movement, often necessitating mechanical ventilation. In addition to no head control, visual tracking, or eye contact, they had arthrogryposis, absence of deep tendon reflexes, poor muscle volume, and growth failure with postnatal microcephaly. Two sibs had bone fractures and the other 2 sibs had seizures, which were associated with hypsarrhythmia in 1. More variable features included tongue fasciculations and optic nerve atrophy. Brain imaging showed variable diffuse atrophy of the cerebrum, cerebellum, brainstem, and spinal cord, and laboratory studies showed increased serum creatine kinase in some patients. Two sibs from a Chinese family had normal development until 4 months of age, followed by neurologic deterioration and developmental regression, severe hypotonia similar to the other patients, and intractable seizures. These patients also had microcephaly, delayed myelination, thin corpus callosum, and reduced white matter volume. All 6 of these patients were immobile, and most were mechanically ventilated; 3 died. Two sibs from an Iraqi-Jewish family had a slightly less severe but similar phenotype: they had onset of severe and intractable seizures at 9 and 11 months of age, respectively, associated with severe developmental regression, delayed psychomotor development, muscle weakness and atrophy, hypertonia, and hyperreflexia, but were able to walk.
Flex et al. (2016) reported 7 children from 5 unrelated families with severely delayed psychomotor development apparent since infancy, moderate to profound intellectual disability, and poor or absent language. Most of the children had hypotonia and all had spastic tetraplegia: 6 had scoliosis, 4 were never able to walk, and 3 never achieved sitting or head control. Six patients had optic atrophy and 4 had microcephaly. Variable dysmorphic features included sparse eyebrows, upslanting palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, micrognathia, and widely spaced teeth. Most patients had swallowing or feeding difficulties and/or chronic constipation. Brain imaging showed cortical atrophy and secondary hypomyelination, followed by cerebellar atrophy, consistent with slowly progressive neurodegeneration. Flex et al. (2016) noted that there were no signs of brain malformation, such as cortical dysplasia or simplified gyral pattern.



PIP5K1C
**Lethal congenital contractural syndrome 3, 611369 (3), AR**
Narkis et al. (2007) described a novel type of autosomal recessive lethal congenital contracture syndrome (LCCS) that, like LCCS2 (607598), was identified in an Israeli Bedouin kindred. The phenotype was similar to that of LCCS2 but lacked the distended bladder (neurogenic bladder defect). Affected individuals were born with severe multiple joint contractures with severe muscle wasting and atrophy, mainly in the legs. Death occurred minutes to hours after birth due to respiratory insufficiency. The phenotype can be distinguished from that of LCCS1 (253310) by the absence of hydrops, fractures, and multiple pterygia.



RIN2
**Macrocephaly, alopecia, cutis laxa, and scoliosis, 613075 (3), AR**
Basel-Vanagaite et al. (2009) described 3 patients, members of 2 related consanguineous Israeli-Arab families, with macrocephaly, downslanting palpebral fissures, puffy eyelids, mild ichthyosis, sagging cheeks, everted lower lip, retrognathia, gingival hyperplasia, abnormal position of the teeth, severe hyperlaxity, flat feet, coarse and swollen facial appearance affecting the eyelids, lips, and cheeks, sparse scalp hair, and moderate to severe scoliosis with short stature. One of the patients also had mild dilatation of the aorta and another one had generalized osteoporosis, more severe in the spine. The cutaneous features were more apparent in the 2 older patients, suggesting that the disorder is progressive. No visceral involvement was noted. The abnormal appearance of the elastic tissue was restricted to the papillary dermis.
Syx et al. (2010) noted similarities between the patients reported by Basel-Vanagaite et al. (2009) and 3 Algerian sibs with an autosomal recessive genodermatosis previously reported by Verloes et al. (2005). The sibs, born to consanguineous parents, had progressive facial coarsening, gingival hypertrophy, severe scoliosis, sparse hair, and skin and joint laxity. Syx et al. (2010) suggested that the MACS acronym may not be the most appropriate to summarize the phenotypic spectrum of the disorder. True macrocephaly (OFC +3 SD) was initially observed in 2 of 5 patients (data not available in 1 patient reported by Basel-Vanagaite et al., 2009) and subsequently regressed to normal in 1 of them, meaning that final OFC was normal in 4 of 5 patients. The 3 patients described by Syx et al. (2010) had sparse hair, not alopecia, and they did not have cutis laxa. Syx et al. (2010) suggested that progressive scoliosis and buccofacial dysmorphism are the most consistent features of the syndrome, but sparse hair as well as joint and skin hyperextensibility also appear to be common to all 6 reported patients.
Albrecht et al. (2010) reported an 18-year-old Lebanese male, born to consanguineous parents, with MACS syndrome. He had mental retardation (IQ 62), short stature (156 cm), macrocephaly (OFC +3.5 SD), bitemporal narrowing, sagging chins, prominent lips, facial coarsening, cutis laxa of the hand, ankles, wrist and neck, gingival overgrowth, irregular teeth, sparse hair, thorax deformity without scoliosis, and brachydactyly of the first, second, and fourth digits of the hands and feet. He did not show signs of easy bruising, vascular abnormalities, hernias, or systemic involvement. Ultrastructural studies of the skin showed characteristic findings of cutis laxa with abnormal elastic fiber number and structure; in deeper layers, there were mild changes in the collagen fibril morphology. Patient fibroblasts showed abnormal morphology of the Golgi apparatus with swollen cisternae and vacuole accumulation.
Aslanger et al. (2014) described 2 sibs of Turkish descent, born to nonconsanguineous parents who came from the same village, with coarse facies and other dysmorphic features consistent with MACS syndrome. Soft, sagging skin, hyperextensibility, and bronchiectases were also present. The sister presented with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. She had increased OFC (+2.7 SD) and her brother was normocephalic. Both sibs had progressive scoliosis, osteoporosis, and sparse scalp hair. Both had normal intelligence.
Kameli et al. (2020) reported a 4-year-old boy with macrocephaly, sparse eyebrows, epicanthal folds, downslanting palpebral fissures, broad nasal bridge, retromicrognathia, coarse facial appearance, and gingival hyperplasia. He also had flat feet, hyperextensible skin, joint laxity, and easy bruising. At age 2 years, he developed an umbilical hernia, which was partially corrected by surgery but still apparent at age 4 years. Neurologic examination was normal, and developmental milestones were reported to be normal. Brain MRI at age 4 years showed diffuse abnormal white matter signal that was more pronounced at the superficial and deep peritrigonal regions, bilateral anterior temporal subcortical cysts, and increased perivascular spaces in the posterior deep white matter. Follow-up brain MRI at age 5 years was unchanged.



TBC1D20
**Warburg micro syndrome 4, 615663 (3), AR**
Warburg Micro syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by microcephaly, microphthalmia, microcornea, congenital cataracts, optic atrophy, cortical dysplasia, in particular corpus callosum hypoplasia, severe mental retardation, spastic diplegia, and hypogonadism (summary by Morris-Rosendahl et al., 2010).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Warburg Micro syndrome, see 600118.
Liegel et al. (2013) studied 7 patients from 5 families with Warburg Micro syndrome due to mutations in the TBC1D20 gene who showed the same range of clinical features observed in WARBM patients with mutations in the RAB3GAP1 (602536), RAB3GAP2 (609275), and RAB18 (602207) genes. Shortly after birth, patients presented with congenital cataracts, microphthalmia, microcornea, and small atonic pupils. Despite cataract surgery, they had poor vision due to optic atrophy, and several affected children also developed glaucoma. All patients with TBC1D20 mutations had severe to profound developmental delay: they did not learn to walk and spoke only 4 to 5 words at most. They also displayed autistic features. Patients had normal head circumferences at birth but developed postnatal microcephaly. Facial features included deep-set eyes, ptosis, broad nasal bridge, relatively narrow mouth, low anterior hairline, and prominent subnasal region. Affected boys exhibited micropenis and cryptorchidism. In the first year of life, all affected individuals had severe axial hypotonia, and then gradually developed lower and upper limb spasticity, resulting in spastic quadriplegia. Cranial MRIs in 4 patients showed predominantly frontal polymicrogyria, corpus callosum hypogenesis particularly involving the splenium, widened lateral ventricles, and megacisterna magna due to cerebellar vermis hypoplasia; follow-up MRIs in 2 of the patients showed atrophy of the cerebellar vermis and hemispheres.



PLCB1
**Epileptic encephalopathy, early infantile, 12, 613722 (3), AR**
Developmental and epileptic encephalopathy-12 (DEE12) is an autosomal recessive neurologic disorder characterized by onset of refractory seizures in the first year of life. Affected infants may have normal or mildly delayed development before the onset of seizures, but thereafter show severe developmental regression and stagnation. Seizure types vary: focal seizures, infantile spasms, and generalized tonic-clonic seizures may occur, even within the same patient. EEG may show hypsarrhythmia, consistent with West syndrome, or a pattern consistent with 'malignant migrating partial seizures in infancy' (MMPSI). Patients have little or no developmental progress: there is absent speech, hypotonia, poor motor skills, peripheral spasticity, and impaired visual fixation (summary by Kurian et al., 2010 and Poduri et al., 2012).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of developmental and epileptic encephalopathy, see 308350.
Kurian et al. (2010) reported a boy, born of consanguineous parents from Bangladesh, who presented with seizures at age 10 weeks. Seizures were characterized by eye rolling, lip smacking, drooling and perioral cyanosis followed by tonic stiffening and flexion of arms and legs. At age 8 months, he developed refractory seizures and regression in all areas of development. By 13 months, EEG showed features of West syndrome, hypsarrhythmia, and generalized slowing, consistent with a diffuse encephalopathic process. He had no meaningful development, with poor visual fixation, severe head lag, axial hypotonia, and spastic quadriparesis. He died of infection at age 2.9 years.
Poduri et al. (2012) reported a male infant, born of consanguineous Palestinian parents, who presented with a clinical diagnosis of malignant migrating partial seizures in infancy (MMPSI). The patient had onset of focal seizures at age 6 months and thereafter showed developmental regression. Symptoms included perioral cyanosis, limpness, mouth automatisms, eyelid fluttering, and eye deviation. He had marked hypotonia, made only gutteral sounds, and did not fix or follow objects. EEG showed multifocal interictal spikes and abundant seizures arising from both hemispheres and showing migration from one hemisphere to another within a seizure. He had multiple seizures per day, and the seizures were refractory to treatment. Poduri et al. (2012) considered the disorder to be electroclinically distinct from that in the patient described by Kurian et al. (2010), who had a normal initial EEG and later developed hypsarrhythmia.



PDE11A
**Pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease, primary, 2, 610475 (3), AD**
Horvath et al. (2006) identified 10 individuals with Cushing syndrome and adrenocortical hyperplasia who did not have PRKAR1A mutations. In most of these individuals, the adrenal glands had an overall normal size and weight and featured multiple small yellow-to-dark brown nodules surrounded by a cortex with a uniform appearance. Microscopically, there was moderate diffuse cortical hyperplasia with mostly nonpigmented nodules, multiple capsular deficits, and massive circumscribed and infiltrating extraadrenal cortical excrescences with micronodules. Although overall there was no pigmentation by regular microscopy, electron microscopy showed granules of lipofuscin and features of a cortisol-producing adrenocortical hyperplasia.



GGT1
**?Glutathioninuria, 231950 (3), AR**
Gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (see GGT1; 612346) acts as a glutathionase and catalyzes the transfer of the glutamyl moiety of glutathione to a variety of amino acids and dipeptide acceptors. This enzyme is located on the outer surface of the cell membrane. It is widely distributed in mammalian tissues involved in absorption and secretion. In humans, hepatic GGT activity is elevated in some liver diseases. GGT is released into the bloodstream after liver damage, and an elevated level of the enzyme may be a useful early sign of hepatocellular carcinoma. Schulman et al. (1975) described a mildly retarded adult male with glutathionemia and marked glutathionuria, whose cultured skin fibroblasts showed very low activity of the transpeptidase. Since several studies have suggested that the transpeptidase may play a role in cellular amino acid transport, the lack of amino aciduria and amino acidemia was noteworthy. O'Daley (1968) may have described the same condition.
Hammond et al. (1995) reported sisters with GGT deficiency. The elder of the 2 sibs was detected during the course of a population screening on infants at 6 weeks of age using ascending paper chromatography of urine, which revealed a migration spot similar to that of cystine. Her growth and development were normal. During the second year, easy bruising was noted. Asthma was diagnosed at 2.5 years but was never a major problem. At 10 years of age, she began having attacks of absence and an EEG showed typical 3-Hz spike and wave activity. Seizures were controlled by valproate medication. At age 21 years, she had no significant health problems, had a good secretarial position, and was pursuing a course at technical college. The younger sister was somewhat hypotonic and inactive at birth and had a dislocated hip and mild bilateral equinovarus. Tube feeding was required for the first 4 months. Problems noted later included strabismus, easy bruising, poor coordination, and some dysmorphic features. A diagnosis of Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS; 176270) was confirmed by demonstration of an interstitial deletion of 15q11-q13. Both sisters had normal red cell glutathione and no Heinz bodies. Clearly there were no specific clinical indicators for GGT deficiency, which in the younger sister was unrelated to PWS.
Darin et al. (2018) reviewed 6 previously reported patients from 4 families. Most patients presented with involvement of central nervous system in the form of mild to moderate mental retardation, behavioral disturbances, and in 1 case, seizures. Marfanoid features were reported in 2 sibs. The age of diagnosis ranged from the second to the sixth decade of life. Darin et al. (2018) described 2 previously unreported sibs born to consanguineous Turkish parents. The brother was diagnosed at 10 years of age. In addition to the previously reported features, he had hypertelorism and low-set ears. The sister was diagnosed at 25 years of age with mild mental retardation, a mild tremor, and mild hyperreflexia. The brother's MRI showed agenesis of the corpus callosum and multiple cortical heterotopias. The girl's MRI was normal. Both sibs had increased glutathionuria and markedly decreased plasma gamma-GT activity of less than 0.05 microKAT per liter (normal range 0.15-0.75).



ROBO2
**Vesicoureteral reflux 2, 610878 (3)**
Lu et al. (2007) described 2 families in which autosomal dominant inheritance of vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) was associated with mutation in the ROBO2 gene. The first was a Caucasian British family in which the affected daughter had bilateral VUR, hypoplastic kidneys, and nephropathy. Her mother required ureteral reimplantation because of severe VUR. The second was a Caucasian Dutch family in which the proband had bilateral VUR and a right duplex collection system and kidney. Her mother and 2 aunts had urinary tract symptoms and ultrasonographic evidence of congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT), whereas her grandmother had a unilateral small kidney.



PPP3CA
**Arthrogryposis, cleft palate, craniosynostosis, and impaired intellectual development, 618265 (3), AD**
ACCIID is characterized by arthrogryposis, cleft palate, craniosynostosis, micrognathia, short stature, and impaired intellectual development. Seizures and bony abnormalities (severe slenderness of the ribs and tubular bones and perinatal fractures) have been observed (Mizuguchi et al., 2018).
Mizuguchi et al. (2018) reported 2 unrelated patients with arthrogryposis, cleft palate, craniosynostosis, micrognathia, short stature, and impaired intellectual development. One patient (patient 5) was a 5-year-old female who had severe hydrops fetalis with ascites and right hydronephrosis on fetal ultrasonography. She had severe feeding difficulties and respiratory distress requiring tube feedings and mechanical ventilation. She had coronal craniosynostosis, hypertelorism, short nose, cleft palate, micrognathia, and arthrogryposis with bilateral talipes equinovalgus. Radiologic examination showed severe slenderness of tubular bones and ribs (gracile bones) with bowing of the radii and delayed calvarial ossification. She also developed several fractures during the neonatal period. She had a hypoplastic left kidney with severe vesicoureteral reflux and severe developmental delay. No seizures were observed. The other patient (patient 6) was a 7-year-old boy who had pedal edema at birth, as well as trigonocephaly, cleft palate, micrognathia, retrognathia, ptosis, arthrogryposis, and brachydactyly. He had significant developmental delay and developed generalized seizures with fever in infancy, which were mild and responsive to treatment. Brain MRI showed periventricular white matter changes with asymmetric ventriculomegaly.
**Epileptic encephalopathy, infantile or early childhood, 1, 617711 (3), AD**
IECEE1 is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by delayed psychomotor development apparent in infancy and resulting in severe to profound intellectual disability with poor or absent speech. Most patients never achieve independent walking. Patients typically have onset of refractory multifocal seizures between the first weeks and years of life, and some may show developmental regression. Additional features, such as hypotonia and cortical visual impairment, are more variable (summary by Myers et al., 2017).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Infantile or Early Childhood Epileptic Encephalopathy
See also IECEE2 (617829), caused by mutation in the GABRB2 gene (600232) on chromosome 5q34, and IECEE3 (618012), caused by mutation in the ATP6V1A gene (607027) on chromosome 3q13.
Myers et al. (2017) reported 6 unrelated patients with an epileptic encephalopathy and severe to profound intellectual disability with poor or absent speech. The patients ranged in age from 5 to 22 years and were of various ethnicities (e.g., European, Ashkenazi, Pakistani). All presented with delayed psychomotor development apparent between birth and 2 years of age. Five patients had onset of seizures between 6 weeks and 4 years of age; the sixth patient had an abnormal EEG with multifocal epileptiform discharges in the absence of overt seizures. Seizure types varied, and included focal, spasms, tonic, myoclonic, tonic-clonic, absence, and atonic. Seizures were refractory to medication in 4 children, and 1 patient with a comparatively mild form of epilepsy had resolution of the seizures at age 16 years. EEG showed multifocal discharges, and 3 patients had hypsarrhythmia. Three patients showed developmental regression; 2 had autistic features and several had behavioral abnormalities. Four patients were nonambulatory and 1 walked with an unsteady gait. Other variable features included hypotonia, abnormal movements, spasticity, dysmorphic facial features, such as hypertelorism, talipes, and cortical visual impairment. Two patients had a feeding tube. Brain imaging was normal in 3 patients, but showed mild nonspecific abnormalities, including cerebral atrophy, delayed myelination, and white matter changes, in the other patients.



TLL1
**Atrial septal defect 6, 613087 (3), AD**



CEP135
**Microcephaly 8, primary, autosomal recessive, 614673 (3), AR**
Hussain et al. (2012) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, with primary microcephaly apparent at birth. Each had a sloping forehead, retrognathia, severe cognitive deficits, and unintelligible speech at age 5 years. One died at age 11 years. The head circumferences ranged between -12 and -14.5 SD. No other abnormalities were noted.
Farooq et al. (2016) reported 2 sibs, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, with MCPH8. The patients had severe learning disabilities and speech impairment, but no seizures. Their head circumferences at the age of 10 and 7 years were -14 and -12 SD, respectively.



EVC
**Ellis-van Creveld syndrome, 225500 (3), AR**
Ellis-van Creveld syndrome is an autosomal recessive skeletal dysplasia characterized by short limbs, short ribs, postaxial polydactyly, and dysplastic nails and teeth. Congenital cardiac defects, most commonly a defect of primary atrial septation producing a common atrium, occur in 60% of affected individuals (summary by Ruiz-Perez et al., 2000).
The clinical features of the Ellis-van Creveld syndrome appear to be identical regardless of whether the disorder is caused by mutation in the EVC gene (604831) or in the EVC2 gene (607261) (Ruiz-Perez et al., 2003, Galdzicka et al., 2002).
The largest pedigree with EVC was that observed by McKusick et al. (1964) in an inbred religious isolate, the Old Order Amish, in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. Almost as many persons were known in this one kindred as had been reported in all the medical literature up to that time. Features are dwarfism with most striking shortening in the distal part of the extremities, polydactyly, fusion of the hamate and capitate bones of the wrist, dystrophy of the fingernails, change in the upper lip variously called 'partial hare-lip,' 'lip-tie,' etc., and cardiac malformation, usually a septal defect and often single atrium. Teeth may already be erupted at birth ('natal teeth;' 187050) and exfoliate prematurely.
From observations in the large Amish kindred, McKusick et al. (1964) concluded that there are no heterozygous manifestations of EVC. However, Fryns (1991) noted the occurrence of unilateral postaxial polydactyly type A (complete extra finger and extra metacarpal) in one parent and one otherwise normal brother of 2 unrelated newborn infants with EVC. Goldblatt et al. (1992) described EVC in a Western Australian Aboriginal community in which 2 relatives were observed to have isolated postaxial polydactyly of the feet. They advanced this as evidence of heterozygous manifestation. In the 2 families reported by Goldblatt et al. (1992), each with 1 case of EVC, the postaxial polydactyly of the feet occurred in a first cousin and a first cousin once removed of the proband in 1 family only.
Engle and Ehlers (1969) described a case of EVC syndrome with unilateral polydactyly. The left hand and the right foot had an extra digit. A second child with EVC had been born in this family; polydactyly of the hands was bilateral (Engle, 1976).
Blackburn and Belliveau (1971) reported 2 sibs EVC with single atrium and hypoplastic left heart syndrome.
Onat (1994) described a patient with single atrium and postaxial hexodactyly. Since the patient had no additional anomalies, all known syndromes, including the EVC combination of malformations, were excluded and it was proposed that the association represented a previously undescribed syndrome. Digilio et al. (1995) described 2 children with this combination and referred to 2 children previously reported in an abstract. They raised the possibility that Ellis-van Creveld syndrome and single atrium/polydactyly syndrome may be related, possibly due to allelic mutations. The parents of one of the children reported by Digilio et al. (1995) were consanguineous, and the father, like the daughter, had postaxial polydactyly of the left hand and both feet, partial atrial ventricular canal with single atrium, and agenesis of the upper lateral incisors bilaterally with enamel abnormalities. His height was 165 cm. The father and daughter were later found to have a mutation in the EVC gene (604831.0005) (Ruiz-Perez et al., 2000).
Spranger and Tariverdian (1995) described a 13-month-old girl with apparently typical EVC whose 32-year-old father had some features that they suggested might be heterozygous manifestations. He had disproportionate short stature (162 cm). Polydactyly was not present either clinically or by x-ray examination. Hands and feet were broad and square with short fingers and toes. He could not make a tight fist. He had dysplastic finger- and toenails, which never needed to be cut and were quite typical of those of EVC. The teeth were conical in shape with side spaces. The father had previously been thought to have Weyers acrodental dysostosis. Spranger and Tariverdian (1995) reviewed other reports of possible heterozygous manifestations.
Howard et al. (1997) studied a 4-generation family with features of Weyers acrofacial dysostosis in which the proband had a more severe phenotype, resembling Ellis-van Creveld syndrome. Weyers acrofacial dysostosis is an autosomal dominant condition with dental anomalies, nail dystrophy, postaxial polydactyly, and mild short stature. EVC is a similar condition, with autosomal recessive inheritance and the additional features of disproportionate dwarfism, thoracic dysplasia, and congenital heart disease.
Mostafa et al. (2005) reported 6 cases of EVC in 3 Egyptian families. All of the families were consanguineous. Father to son or daughter transmission was observed in 2 of the families, thus demonstrating pseudodominant inheritance. None of the presumed heterozygotes in these families exhibited abnormalities of the body, limbs, or orodental structures. Bifid tip of the tongue was found in all affected individuals. Mostafa et al. (2005) suggested that midline orodental anomalies should be sought in cases of EVC and Weyers acrofacial dysostosis, and that their presence or absence might be a differentiating feature between the 2 disorders.
**?Weyers acrofacial dysostosis, 193530 (3), AD**
Weyers acrofacial dysostosis is an autosomal dominant condition with dental anomalies, nail dystrophy, postaxial polydactyly, and mild short stature. Ellis-van Creveld syndrome is a similar disorder, with autosomal recessive inheritance and the additional features of disproportionate dwarfism, thoracic dysplasia, and congenital heart disease (summary by Howard et al., 1997).
Under the designation acrofacial dysostosis, Weyers (1952) described a syndrome of postaxial polydactyly with anomalies of the lower jaw, dentition and oral vestibule, and proposed autosomal dominant inheritance. Weyers (1956) was aware of similarities to the Ellis-van Creveld syndrome.
Roubicek and Spranger (1984) reported an affected 4-generation family. Lower and upper incisors were abnormal in shape and number. Additional findings were prominent ear antihelices, hypoplastic and dysplastic nails, and mild shortness of stature. Inheritance was dominant (no male-to-male transmission was observed) with variable expression. To differentiate it from other acrofacial dysostoses, they suggested naming the condition acrodental dysostosis.
Curry and Hall (1979) described a large Spanish-Mexican family in which several members had an autosomal dominant syndrome of postaxial polydactyly, conical teeth, nail dysplasia, and short limbs. Shapiro et al. (1984) reported a similar, isolated case in a 16-year-old male of Cherokee, Irish and German extraction. His father and mother, who were not related, were 32 and 26 years of age, respectively, at his birth. Roubicek and Spranger (1984) concluded that patients reported by Curry and Hall (1979) and Shapiro et al. (1984) had Weyers acrofacial dysostosis.
Turnpenny (1995) examined a family with features that suggested some overlap between this disorder and Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS; 146510). This family had a mother and son affected with fourth finger duplication and nail and dental dysplasia. The mother had gelastic epilepsy (a form characterized by laughter) and the son had imperforate anus. The absence of MRI findings of hypothalamic hamartomas in these patients argued against Pallister-Hall syndrome but gelastic epilepsy has been associated with hypothalamic lesions, suggesting a functional if not anatomic lesion of this area.



TERT
**{Dyskeratosis congenita, autosomal recessive 4}, 613989 (3), AR, AD**
Dyskeratosis congenita is a multisystem disorder caused by defective telomere maintenance. Features are variable and include bone marrow failure, pulmonary and liver fibrosis, and premature graying of the hair (summary by Armanios et al., 2005).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of dyskeratosis congenita, see DKCA1 (127550).
Armanios et al. (2005) reported a 3-generation family in which at least 6 members had autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita without skin manifestations. Common but variable features included gray forelock or premature graying, aplastic anemia, low platelets, osteoporosis, pulmonary fibrosis, liver fibrosis, and abnormal dentition. Anticipation of clinical features was observed, and all affected individuals showed increased frequency of short telomeres compared to unaffected family members. Molecular analysis excluded the TERC gene (602322) and identified a pathogenic heterozygous mutation in the TERT gene (187270.0007).
Basel-Vanagaite et al. (2008) reported an Iraqi Jewish family with autosomal dominant dyskeratosis congenita-2. Affected males presented with thrombocytopenia, and later developed aplastic anemia, premature graying of the hair, and pulmonary and hepatic fibrosis. One patient developed cardiac fibrosis and another developed dilated cardiomyopathy. Anticipation for these features was observed. Whereas all 6 males of the family were severely affected, 2 female mutation carriers had only premature gray hair; however, all mutation carriers had a similar shortening of telomere length.
Autosomal Recessive Dyskeratosis Congenita 4
Marrone et al. (2007) reported 2 unrelated patients, both born of consanguineous parents, with autosomal recessive dyskeratosis congenita-4. A 13-year-old Libyan girl had poor growth, bone marrow failure, reticulated pigmentation of the skin, leukoplakia, and nail dysplasia. Her parents had mild manifestations, such as dysplastic toenails and hyperpigmented skin. The second patient was a 3-year-old girl, born of consanguineous Iranian-Jewish parents, who had early bone marrow failure, leukoplakia, failure to thrive, cerebellar hypoplasia, microcephaly, and developmental delay. Telomere lengths were severely shortened in the patient and at the low-normal level in each parent. Marrone et al. (2007) noted that the presence of developmental delay and cerebellar hypoplasia in the second patient was consistent with a clinical diagnosis of Hoyeraal-Hreidarsson syndrome, which is a severe variant of DKC.
Du et al. (2008) reported a 31-year-old Scottish man with DKCB4 who had a severe phenotype, including short stature, elfin appearance, esophageal stricture, leukoplakia of the buccal mucosa, anus, and penis, abnormal pigmentation, hyperkeratosis of his palms, ridged fingernails, avascular necrosis of both hips, tooth loss, chronic diarrhea, learning difficulties, pulmonary infiltrates, and progressive bone marrow failure. Laboratory studies showed very short telomeres, and genetic analysis showed a homozygous mutation in the TERT gene (187270.0014).
**{Leukemia, acute myeloid}, 601626 (3), AD, Somatic mutation**
Shields et al. (2003) published a case report on acute myeloid leukemia that presented as bilateral orbital myeloid sarcoma (or chloroma) in a previously healthy 25-month-old boy. Bone marrow biopsy revealed blasts and cells with maturing monocytic features. A final diagnosis of M5b AML was made. The authors reviewed the literature and concluded that leukemia may be the most likely diagnosis in a child with bilateral soft tissue orbital tumors.
**{Melanoma, cutaneous malignant, 9}, 615134 (3)**
Malignant melanoma is a neoplasm of pigment-producing cells called melanocytes that occurs most often in the skin, but may also occur in the eyes, ears, gastrointestinal tract, leptomeninges, and oral and genital mucous membranes (summary by Habif, 2010).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of malignant melanoma, see 155600.
Horn et al. (2013) reported a 4-generation family with 14 melanoma patients who were not carriers of germline mutations in the melanoma susceptibility genes CDKN2A (600160) or CDK4 (123829). Two family members had additional forms of cancer. One individual, who developed melanoma at the age of 20, later developed ovarian cancer, renal cell carcinoma, bladder cancer, mammary carcinoma, and finally bronchial carcinoma, leading to her death at age 50. The other individual presented with ovarian cancer at age 27 and melanoma at age 30.
**{Pulmonary fibrosis and/or bone marrow failure, telomere-related, 1}, 614742 (3), AD**
Shortened telomeres can cause a wide variety of clinical features that constitute a phenotypic spectrum. The most severe form is dyskeratosis congenita (see, e.g., 127750), characterized by early childhood onset of skin abnormalities, bone marrow failure, predisposition to malignancy, and risk of pulmonary and hepatic fibrosis. Adult-onset pulmonary fibrosis is the most common manifestation of mutant telomerase genes. Other manifestations include aplastic anemia due to bone marrow failure, hepatic fibrosis, and increased cancer risk, particularly myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Phenotype, age at onset, and severity are determined by telomere length, not just telomerase mutation (summary by Armanios, 2009).
The genetic diagnosis of telomere-related bone marrow failure and pulmonary fibrosis has implications for treatment because affected individuals generally do not respond to immunosuppression and may be at increased risk for fatal complications after bone marrow or lung transplantation (Parry et al., 2011).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Telomere-Related Pulmonary Fibrosis and/or Bone Marrow Failure
Also see PFBMFT2 (614743), caused by mutation in the TERC gene (602322) on chromosome 3q26; PFBMFT3 (616373), caused by mutation in the RTEL1 gene (608833) on chromosome 20q13; PFBMFT4 (616371), caused by mutation in the PARN gene (604212) on chromosome 16p13; and PFBMFT5 (618674), caused by mutation in the ZCCHC8 gene (616381) on chromosome 12q24.
Yamaguchi et al. (2005) reported 7 unrelated patients with aplastic anemia who had heterozygous germline mutations in the TERT gene (187270.0001-187270.0005). The patients ranged in age from 31 to 75 years. Bone marrow showed low cellularity, and patient leukocytes had short telomeres (most below 10% of controls) and low telomerase enzymatic activity (most less than 1% of controls). Four patients had family members with hematologic disorders, including myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia. In 1 family, members carrying the mutation also had short telomeres and reduced telomerase activity but no evident hematologic abnormalities.
Armanios et al. (2007) reported 5 families in which at least 2 members had adult-onset pulmonary fibrosis. The age at onset ranged from 48 to 77 years. Presenting symptoms included dyspnea or cough, and pulmonary function tests were below predicted values. Only 2 probands had a smoking history. Lung biopsy showed usual interstitial pneumonia or idiopathic interstitial pneumonia. None of the patients had skin abnormalities or cytopenias. Telomere lengths in lymphocytes of affected individuals were at or below 10% of control values.
Kirwan et al. (2009) reported 2 unrelated families with variable manifestations of telomere-related pulmonary fibrosis and/or bone marrow failure-1. The proband in 1 family had adult-onset aplastic anemia and fibrosing alveolitis, whereas his father had adult-onset myelodysplastic syndrome. In the second family, the proband presented with adult-onset myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia, whereas her sister had aplastic anemia.
Diaz de Leon et al. (2011) compared pulmonary, blood, skin, and bone parameters for 20 subjects from 11 kindreds with familial pulmonary fibrosis with heterozygous TERT mutations and 20 family members who had not inherited a TERT mutation to identify the spectrum of phenotypes associated with mutations in this gene. The 2 groups were matched for sex, age, and cigarette smoking. Three of the TERT mutation carriers already met diagnostic criteria for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. The other carriers were apparently healthy. Asymptomatic carriers exhibited significantly lower diffusing capacity of lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO), impaired recruitment of DLCO with exercise, radiographic signs of lung fibrosis, and increased fractional lung tissue volume quantified by high-resolution chest CT scan than noncarriers. Red blood cell and platelet counts were significantly lower, and the mean corpuscular volume and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentrations were significantly higher in carriers than in noncarriers. Carriers reported significantly earlier graying of hair than noncarriers. TERT mutation status was most accurately predicted by short telomere lengths than by any of the measured phenotypes.
Parry et al. (2011) demonstrated that a personal and family history of both aplastic anemia and pulmonary fibrosis is highly predictive for the presence of a germline mutation in the TERT or the TERC gene. They performed a retrospective study of 10 patients referred for bone marrow failure or pulmonary fibrosis who had a family history of the other disorder. Six cases presented initially with aplastic anemia and 4 initially with interstitial lung disease. Six of the 10 were subsequently diagnosed with a second feature, including pulmonary or hepatic fibrosis, or hypoplastic marrow. The mean age at diagnosis for those who presented with aplastic anemia was significantly younger than those with pulmonary fibrosis (14 vs 51 years). All patients had at least 1 other first-degree relative with bone marrow failure or pulmonary disease, and the transmission pattern was consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance. In 8 of 10 families, there was phenotypic heterogeneity across generations: older generations first manifested with pulmonary fibrosis, whereas subsequent generations manifested with bone marrow failure at an earlier age. Although none had skin manifestations, most had premature graying of the hair before age 25 years. All 10 probands had a mutation in either the TERT (7 probands) (see, e.g., 187270.0018-187270.0020) or the TERC (3 probands) (see, e.g., 602322.0008 and 602322.0012) gene, and the mutations segregated with the disorder. The mutant genes were associated with very short telomerase length in patient lymphocytes (less than 1% of control values). Parry et al. (2011) concluded that the complex of bone marrow failure and pulmonary fibrosis is highly specific for the presence of a germline telomerase defect.
Gansner et al. (2012) reported a 56-year-old man with telomere-related pulmonary fibrosis and bone marrow failure-1. He was diagnosed with pulmonary fibrosis at age 49. He had mild pancytopenia with moderately hypocellular bone marrow. The patient had a family history of a similar disorder: his father and 1 sister had pulmonary fibrosis, a second sister had pulmonary fibrosis and thrombocytopenia, and a third sister had pulmonary fibrosis and acute myeloid leukemia. Telomere lengths in the proband were less than 1% of control values.



ADAMTS2
**Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, dermatosparaxis type, 225410 (3), AR**
Dermatosparaxis (meaning 'tearing of skin') is an autosomal recessive disorder of connective tissue resulting from deficiency of procollagen peptidase, an enzyme that aids in the processing of type I procollagen. The disorder and the responsible biochemical defect was first observed in cattle (Lapiere et al., 1971). Lapiere and Nusgens (1993) reviewed the discovery of dermatosparaxis in cattle, the elucidation of the disorder, its occurrence in other animals, and the delayed recognition of the disorder in the human.
Lichtenstein et al. (1973) reported 2 patients with severe joint hyperextensibility and mild stretchability and bruisability of the skin similar to that seen in dermatosparaxis in cattle. Other clinical features in the patients included short stature, epicanthal folds, depressed nasal bridge, and micrognathia. Cultured fibroblasts showed decreased activity of procollagen peptidase. Lichtenstein et al. (1973) concluded that the clinical manifestations were related to impaired enzymatic conversion of procollagen to collagen due to an enzyme defect.
Nusgens et al. (1992) reported an affected 2-year-old girl with dysmorphic facial features and soft skin. She had large-appearing eyes and thickened eyelids, small stature, and lack of ossification of cranial bones. Easy bruising was noted at the end of the first year, and she developed a left occipital fracture with massive hematoma following a minor fall. EDS was suspected on the basis of blue sclerae and soft, velvety, hyperextensible skin. She also had marked bruising and open wounds following minor trauma, and suturing was not possible due to the extreme fragility of the skin. Surgical removal of a large umbilical hernia was performed at the age of 20 months; the excised skin could be torn by hand. The parents were unrelated and phenotypically normal. Electron microscopy of skin samples demonstrated altered polymers seen as hieroglyphic pictures, accumulation of type I p-N-alpha-1 and p-N-alpha-2 polypeptides in the dermis, and absence of processing of these polypeptides in fibroblast cultures, similar to that observed in animal models of dermatosparaxis. The authors postulated a deficiency of procollagen I N-proteinase. Nusgens et al. (1992) noted that the clinical manifestations of EDS VIIC were different from those of EDS VIIA (130060) and VIIB, in which the clinical picture is dominated by joint laxity and subluxations. The skin fragility EDS VIIC can be as severe as that observed in the dermatosparactic calves. Thus, the clinical picture is that of dermatosparaxis and not that of arthrochalasis multiplex congenita.
Wertelecki et al. (1992) provided clinical details of the 2 patients reported by Smith et al. (1992). The authors emphasized the large fontanels and wide sagittal and metopic sutures, blue sclerae, micrognathia, and umbilical hernia. Electron microscopic examination of the skin showed collagen sheets rather than fibrils, and characteristic distortions resembling hieroglyphics.
Petty et al. (1993) reported a patient with dermatosparaxis, emphasizing marked skin fragility and laxity, blue sclerae, increased bruisability, micrognathia, umbilical hernia, and growth retardation. The patient was a male infant born at 35 weeks' gestation after premature rupture of the membranes. He presented at birth with large full-thickness groin fissures, large fontanels, umbilical hernia, and dental laminal cysts. The diagnosis of dermatosparaxis was made by electron microscopic findings consisting of characteristic small, irregular, and circular collagen fibers in the skin.
Reardon et al. (1995) described a case of dermatosparaxis in a 15-year-old girl and noted that 3 previously reported patients with this disorder died before the age of 3 years. Easy bruising, severe skin laxity and fragility, extensive scar formation, and joint laxity were the main clinical manifestations in their patient. Her soft, doughy skin was easily stretchable, but did not recoil. Electron microscopy showed typical hieroglyphic figures upon cross-section of collagen fibrils.
Malfait et al. (2004) reported a 5-year-old boy with dermatosparaxis-type EDS and provided follow-up of 2 previously reported patients at the ages of 7 and 12 years. All had characteristic facial features, including large fontanels in infancy, puffy eyelids, epicanthal folds, downslanting palpebral fissures, and micrognathia. Skin was soft, doughy, and redundant. They had short limbs, hands, feet, fingers, and toes. Two patients had spontaneous bladder rupture and 1 had rupture of the diaphragm following vomiting. Orofacial features included gingival hyperplasia, hypodontia, microdontia, and tooth discoloration. Deciduous dentition showed abnormal morphology of the molars and enamel attrition. Skin bruising, skin tearing, and joint hypermobility increased with age.
Colige et al. (2004) reported a boy with EDS dermatosparaxis type confirmed by genetic analysis (604539.0003). At birth, there was rupture of the umbilical cord and generalized edema with swollen eyelids. Craniofacial features included short forehead, flat supraorbital ridges, broad nasal root, wide nares, large mouth, micrognathia, hypodontia, gingival hyperplasia, and hypertrichosis. He had short hands, arms, and legs. Other features included joint hypermobility, easy bruising, fragile skin, and blue sclera. In vitro studies showed impaired aminocollagen processing.
Bar-Yosef et al. (2008) reported an infant of Ashkenazi Jewish origin with EDS dermatosparaxis type confirmed by genetic analysis (604539.0001). He was delivered preterm by cesarean due to fetal heart decelerations and with multiple congenital nontraumatic skull fractures and intracranial hemorrhage. Eight days prior to delivery the mother was admitted to the hospital with premature rupture of the membranes. He died at age 145 days due to sepsis. Family history indicated that the paternal and maternal grandparents originated in Belarus.
Van Damme et al. (2016) reported 5 new patients from 4 unrelated families with the dermatosparaxis type of EDS, bringing the total of molecularly characterized patients to 15. Three of these patients displayed a phenotype that was milder than previously reported. Among the 5 newly reported patients, only 1 had preterm birth, and none exhibited severe neonatal complications. All had a large fontanel and blue sclerae, but only 1 had eyelid edema and blepharochalasis, which was a common feature in previously reported cases. Umbilical hernia was present in all 5 of the newly reported patients and in 14 of 15 patients overall. Van Damme et al. (2016) suggested updated diagnostic criteria, including major diagnostic criteria of severe skin fragility; sagging, redundant skin; easy bruising; and a typical facial gestalt that is congenital and/or postnatal and progressive, with swelling of the periorbital soft tissue, blue sclerae, downslanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, micrognathia, delayed fontanel closure, and dental anomalies. Suggested minor diagnostic criteria included postnatal growth restriction, short limbs with short hands and feet, joint hypermobility, umbilical hernia, and congenital or postnatal visceral and vascular fragility. The authors noted that arterial rupture and aortic dilatation had not been reported.



SMN1
**Spinal muscular atrophy-1, 253300 (3), AR**
Spinal muscular atrophy refers to a group of autosomal recessive neuromuscular disorders characterized by degeneration of the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord, leading to symmetrical muscle weakness and atrophy (summary by Wirth, 2000).
Four types of SMA are recognized depending on the age of onset, the maximum muscular activity achieved, and survivorship: type I, severe infantile acute SMA, or Werdnig-Hoffman disease; type II (253550), or infantile chronic SMA; type III (253400), juvenile SMA, or Wohlfart-Kugelberg-Welander disease; and type IV (271150), or adult-onset SMA. All types are caused by recessive mutations in the SMN1 gene.
Lunn and Wang (2008) provided a detailed review of clinical features, molecular pathogenesis, and therapeutic strategies for SMA.
Many groups observed the occurrence of different SMA subtypes within the same family, suggesting different manifestations of a single disease entity. Ghetti et al. (1971) reported that in many families 'malignant' Werdnig-Hoffmann disease coexisted with the Werdnig-Hoffmann disease with a prolonged course, the Wohlfart-Kugelberg-Welander disease with infantile onset, and the Wohlfart-Kugelberg-Welander disease with juvenile onset. Pearn et al. (1973) suggested that both the age of onset and the age of death were important in delineating this disorder and that therefore it should be called the infantile acute form of Werdnig and Hoffmann.
Feingold et al. (1977) referred to 'acute' and 'chronic' forms of infantile spinal muscular atrophy.
Zerres and Grimm (1983) presented a pedigree in which 2 males died at the age of 13 and 19 months, respectively, of the Werdnig-Hoffmann type of spinal muscular atrophy; a son and daughter of a great-aunt of theirs died at the age of 6 and 3.4 years, respectively, of Werdnig-Hoffmann disease, and a 59-year-old son of a great-uncle of theirs suffered from SMA of the Kugelberg-Welander type, with onset at age 12 years.
Thomas and Dubowitz (1994) found a correlation between age of onset and age of death in 2 cohorts of patients with spinal muscular atrophy, consisting of 36 and 70 patients, respectively. In one cohort, the shortest survival was 5 hours, and the longest was 19 months. In the other cohort, the mean age of onset was 1.6 months and the mean age of death was 9.6 months. The data further suggested that patients with onset before 2 months of age have a poor prognosis, with earlier death than those with slightly later onset who still fulfill the diagnostic criteria for type I.
Lumaka et al. (2009) reported a boy from central Africa with classic type 1 SMA confirmed by genetic analysis. He presented at birth with axial hypotonia and poor spontaneous movements. By age 5.5 months, he had extreme hypotonia, was unable to hold his head up, and showed psychomotor delay. He had joint laxity, severe proximal muscle weakness, umbilical hernia, atrial septal defect, and recurrent pulmonary infections resulting in death by age 10 months. EMG studies showed evidence for an alpha-motor neuron defect. An older brother who died at 10 months was reportedly similarly affected. Lumaka et al. (2009) noted that this was the first documented report of SMA type 1 in central Africa.
Pathologic Findings
Muscle biopsies of infantile spinal muscular atrophy demonstrate large numbers of round atrophic fibers and clumps of hypertrophic fibers that are type 1 by the ATPase reaction. Soubrouillard et al. (1995) performed immunohistochemical analyses of biopsied skeletal muscle from 23 cases of infantile SMA to determine the expression of developmentally regulated cytoskeletal components, including desmin (125660), NCAM (116930), vimentin (193060), and embryonic and fetal forms of the myosin heavy chain. Strong NCAM and developmental myosin heavy chain expression was present in atrophic fibers.
**Spinal muscular atrophy-2, 253550 (3), AR**
Spinal muscular atrophy refers to a group of autosomal recessive neuromuscular disorders characterized by degeneration of the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord, leading to symmetric muscle weakness and atrophy (summary by Wirth, 2000).
Fried and Emery (1971) suggested the existence of a distinct form of spinal muscular atrophy intermediate in severity between the infantile form SMA type I and juvenile form SMA III. The intermediate form, which they designated SMA II, is characterized by onset usually between 3 and 15 months and survival beyond 4 years and usually until adolescence or later. Proximal muscle weakness is the cardinal feature as in other forms of spinal muscular atrophy. They presented 14 cases, of whom 2 were sibs. The parents were all unaffected and nonconsanguineous.
Imai et al. (1995) demonstrated peripheral but not central conduction abnormalities in patients with SMA II.
Pearn et al. (1973) used a method of sib-sib correlation introduced by Haldane (1941) to support the existence of separate 'acute' and 'chronic' forms of spinal muscular atrophy.
Hanson and Bundey (1974) described 2 brothers in a sibship of 4. They suggested that SMA I and SMA III may be due to homozygosity of allelic genes, and SMA II could represent the genetic compound.
Hausmanowa-Petrusewicz et al. (1985) referred to this as the infantile chronic form of SMA.
Imai et al. (1995) demonstrated peripheral but not central conduction abnormalities in patients with SMA II.
**Spinal muscular atrophy-3, 253400 (3), AR**
SMA is an autosomal recessive neuromuscular disorder characterized by progressive proximal muscle weakness and atrophy affecting the upper and lower limbs. By convention, SMA is classified into 4 types: I (SMA1; 253300), II (SMA2; 253550), III (SMA3), and IV (271150), by increasing age at onset and decreasing clinical severity. SMA1 is the most severe form of the disorder and often results in death in early childhood. SMA3, known as the juvenile form, tends to show onset in childhood or adolescence (summary by Fraidakis et al., 2012).
Kugelberg and Welander (1956) reported 5 children, among the 12 offspring of normal parents, with a juvenile form of spinal muscular atrophy; 2 of the 5 were monozygotic twins.
Levy and Wittig (1962) described proximal muscular atrophy in 2 half brothers, with onset at 13 and 16 years. Onset of the juvenile form is usually between 2 and 17 years of age. Atrophy and weakness of proximal limb muscles, primarily in the legs, is followed by distal involvement. Usually the cases are diagnosed as limb-girdle muscular dystrophy until they are studied fully. Twitchings (fasciculations) are an important differentiating sign. Muscular biopsy and electromyography show the true nature of the process as a lower motor neuron disease. Pulmonary dysfunction is often a cause of morbidity in these patients.
Samaha et al. (1994) studied forced vital capacity longitudinally in 40 SMA patients ranging in age from 5 to 18 years. Although the majority of the patients grew in height, only 35% showed an increase in height-adjusted forced vital capacity. In the most seriously affected patients, all lost height-adjusted forced vital capacity over time. Furukawa et al. (1968) reported 2 families, each with affected brother and sister. The parents in one family were first cousins. The authors pointed out that in their cases, as well as in those in the literature, the symptoms of female patients were mild and the clinical course slow whereas male sibs were severely affected. They interpreted this as sex-influence.
Bundey and Filomeno (1974) described a black sibship in which 5 sibs out of 10 had this disorder.
Pearn et al. (1978) reported a spinal muscular atrophy syndrome characterized by adolescent onset, gross hypertrophy of the calves, and a slowly progressive clinical course. One of their families with 2 affected brothers and 2 affected maternal uncles probably had Kennedy disease (313200), an X-linked form of SMA with which calf hypertrophy has been observed.
Fraidakis et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated French men, aged 44 and 50 years, with SMA type III. Both had onset of slowly progressive proximal lower limb weakness beginning in adolescence, followed by proximal upper limb weakness. At age 44, the first patient patient had proximal lower limb amyotrophy, proximal upper and lower limb weakness, and absence of lower limb reflexes; he used a cane to walk. Muscle biopsy and EMG showed a chronic neuropathic process. The second patient developed muscle cramps and was wheelchair-bound at age 48. Physical examination showed severe motor deficit and amyotrophy in the pelvic and shoulder girdles, as well as severe motor deficit and amyotrophy in the distal limb muscles. EMG was consistent with severe chronic denervation at all extremities. Fraidakis et al. (2012) commented on the relatively mild disease course in these patients and suggested that there were likely compensatory factors affecting expression of the SMN genes.
**Spinal muscular atrophy-4, 271150 (3), AR**
Pearn et al. (1978) described 9 patients from 6 families with adult-onset spinal muscular atrophy. The median age at onset was 35 years, and the mean age at initial medical presentation was 37 years. The condition was relatively benign, with symmetrical proximal muscle involvement and preservation of the distal musculature. Family studies suggested autosomal recessive inheritance.
Brahe et al. (1995) reported 6 patients from 4 families with autosomal recessive adult-onset SMA. Age at onset ranged from 20 to 32 years, and symptoms included tongue fasciculations, hand tremor, symmetrical weakness of the proximal muscles that was more severe in the lower limbs, and atrophy of the quadriceps muscle. Three patients had bilateral hypertrophy of the calves. One patient was very mildly affected; 3 patients had done military service, apparently without problems. In a letter, Zerres et al. (1995) noted that they defined SMA type IV as onset after age 30; patients with onset before age 30 years who retained the ability to walk were defined as having SMA type III.
Clermont et al. (1995) reported a 73-year-old woman who developed type IV SMA at age 47, with proximal muscle weakness, muscular atrophy, and patellar areflexia. Three of her 5 children had SMA type II, and all died before age 15 years. Molecular analysis showed that the mother had deletion of SMN exons 7 and 8 on both chromosomes, but no DNA from the children was available. Clermont et al. (1995) concluded that adult and childhood SMA are allelic disorders, emphasizing the continuum of clinical phenotypes caused by SMN gene mutations and deletions.



SMN2
**{Spinal muscular atrophy, type III, modifier of}, 253400 (3), AR**
SMA is an autosomal recessive neuromuscular disorder characterized by progressive proximal muscle weakness and atrophy affecting the upper and lower limbs. By convention, SMA is classified into 4 types: I (SMA1; 253300), II (SMA2; 253550), III (SMA3), and IV (271150), by increasing age at onset and decreasing clinical severity. SMA1 is the most severe form of the disorder and often results in death in early childhood. SMA3, known as the juvenile form, tends to show onset in childhood or adolescence (summary by Fraidakis et al., 2012).
Kugelberg and Welander (1956) reported 5 children, among the 12 offspring of normal parents, with a juvenile form of spinal muscular atrophy; 2 of the 5 were monozygotic twins.
Levy and Wittig (1962) described proximal muscular atrophy in 2 half brothers, with onset at 13 and 16 years. Onset of the juvenile form is usually between 2 and 17 years of age. Atrophy and weakness of proximal limb muscles, primarily in the legs, is followed by distal involvement. Usually the cases are diagnosed as limb-girdle muscular dystrophy until they are studied fully. Twitchings (fasciculations) are an important differentiating sign. Muscular biopsy and electromyography show the true nature of the process as a lower motor neuron disease. Pulmonary dysfunction is often a cause of morbidity in these patients.
Samaha et al. (1994) studied forced vital capacity longitudinally in 40 SMA patients ranging in age from 5 to 18 years. Although the majority of the patients grew in height, only 35% showed an increase in height-adjusted forced vital capacity. In the most seriously affected patients, all lost height-adjusted forced vital capacity over time. Furukawa et al. (1968) reported 2 families, each with affected brother and sister. The parents in one family were first cousins. The authors pointed out that in their cases, as well as in those in the literature, the symptoms of female patients were mild and the clinical course slow whereas male sibs were severely affected. They interpreted this as sex-influence.
Bundey and Filomeno (1974) described a black sibship in which 5 sibs out of 10 had this disorder.
Pearn et al. (1978) reported a spinal muscular atrophy syndrome characterized by adolescent onset, gross hypertrophy of the calves, and a slowly progressive clinical course. One of their families with 2 affected brothers and 2 affected maternal uncles probably had Kennedy disease (313200), an X-linked form of SMA with which calf hypertrophy has been observed.
Fraidakis et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated French men, aged 44 and 50 years, with SMA type III. Both had onset of slowly progressive proximal lower limb weakness beginning in adolescence, followed by proximal upper limb weakness. At age 44, the first patient patient had proximal lower limb amyotrophy, proximal upper and lower limb weakness, and absence of lower limb reflexes; he used a cane to walk. Muscle biopsy and EMG showed a chronic neuropathic process. The second patient developed muscle cramps and was wheelchair-bound at age 48. Physical examination showed severe motor deficit and amyotrophy in the pelvic and shoulder girdles, as well as severe motor deficit and amyotrophy in the distal limb muscles. EMG was consistent with severe chronic denervation at all extremities. Fraidakis et al. (2012) commented on the relatively mild disease course in these patients and suggested that there were likely compensatory factors affecting expression of the SMN genes.



PRKN
**Adenocarcinoma of lung, somatic, 211980 (3)**
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths in the U.S. and worldwide. The 2 major forms of lung cancer are nonsmall cell lung cancer and small cell lung cancer (see 182280), which account for 85% and 15% of all lung cancers, respectively. Nonsmall cell lung cancer can be divided into 3 major histologic subtypes: squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and large cell lung cancer. Cigarette smoking causes all types of lung cancer, but it is most strongly linked with small cell lung cancer and squamous cell carcinoma. Adenocarcinoma is the most common type in patients who have never smoked. Nonsmall cell lung cancer is often diagnosed at an advanced stage and has a poor prognosis (summary by Herbst et al., 2008).
Joishy et al. (1977) described identical twins who developed symptoms of alveolar cell carcinoma almost simultaneously.
Ahrendt et al. (2001) noted that incidence rates for squamous cell and small cell lung carcinoma began falling among males in the mid-1980s, but a decline in the incidence of primary adenocarcinoma of the lung among males was not observed until 5 to 10 years later. Similarly, although the incidence rates of squamous cell, large cell, and small cell lung carcinoma among women leveled off or started to decrease, the incidence of adenocarcinoma continued to increase. With these changes in the incidence among the different histologic types of lung carcinoma over the 1990s, adenocarcinoma of the lung became the most common type of lung carcinoma in the U.S. (Wingo et al., 1999).
**Ovarian cancer, somatic, 167000 (3)**
Ovarian cancer, the leading cause of death from gynecologic malignancy, is characterized by advanced presentation with loco-regional dissemination in the peritoneal cavity and the rare incidence of visceral metastases (Chi et al., 2001). These typical features relate to the biology of the disease, which is a principal determinant of outcome (Auersperg et al., 2001). Epithelial ovarian cancer is the most common form and encompasses 5 major histologic subtypes: papillary serous, endometrioid, mucinous, clear cell, and transitional cell. Epithelial ovarian cancer arises as a result of genetic alterations sustained by the ovarian surface epithelium (Stany et al., 2008; Soslow, 2008).
**Parkinson disease, juvenile, type 2, 600116 (3), AR**
An autosomal recessive form of familial juvenile parkinsonism, defined as onset before age 40 years, was described in a Japanese family by Takahashi et al. (1994). Juvenile-onset Parkinson disease is symptomatically different in several aspects from classic late-onset Parkinson disease (PD; 168600), although classic symptoms of PD, such as bradykinesia, rigidity, and tremor, are present. Takahashi et al. (1994) commented that the familial occurrence in Japanese PDJ patients with cases was approximately 40 to 50% and that the inheritance pattern appeared to be mostly autosomal recessive. They reported a family in which 4 of 5 sibs were affected and the parents were first cousins. A full pathologic examination of 1 of the sibs, a 67-year-old woman, was presented. The substantia nigra (SN) showed obvious neuronal loss and gliosis in the medial and ventrolateral regions. In the remainder of that region and in the locus ceruleus, the population of neurons was reduced and there was low melanin content in most of the neurons but no detectable gliosis or extraneuronal free melanin pigment suggestive of a neurodegenerative process. There were no Lewy bodies. The entire pathologic picture was different from that of Lewy body Parkinson disease (168601). This patient had been well until about the age of 10 years when gait disturbance appeared. By age 14, she was unable to walk long distances. By her forties, she was unable to walk without assistance. There was no evidence of dementia. She had been slow-moving and had shown frozen gait and tremor, more evident on motion, in the head and upper and lower limbs. She showed improvement of the movement disorder after waking up in the morning. When she was young, the improvement lasted until evening, but as she aged it became progressively shorter, eventually lasting only about 10 minutes. In the other sibs, gait disturbance began at the age of 8 or 9 years. One sister had died at age 42 years and a brother at the age of 27 years, both in a bedridden state.
Ishikawa and Tsuji (1996) described the clinical features of 17 patients from 12 Japanese families with familial juvenile parkinsonism. In 11 of these families affected members were products of consanguineous matings. All 12 families resided within the same geographic area, raising the possibility of founder effect. The mean age of onset was 27 years, with a range from 9 to 43. The most prominent symptoms were retropulsion, dystonia of the feet, and hyperreflexia with classic parkinsonism. Symptoms of tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia were mild. Patients responded to levodopa but dopa-induced dyskinesias and wearing-off phenomena occurred frequently.
Bonifati et al. (1994) reported a man who presented with Parkinson disease at age 28. He was born of a consanguineous mating between a man who developed Parkinson disease at age 74 and his first cousin, who apparently was not affected with parkinsonian symptoms; however, the maternal grandfather developed Parkinson disease at age 65. Bonifati et al. (1994) speculated that the proband may have been homozygous for a defective Parkinson disease gene, which in heterozygous form gave rise to late-onset Parkinson disease in the affected father and maternal grandfather.
Mitsui et al. (1994) described a sister and a brother, the only offspring of a first-cousin mating, with atypical juvenile parkinsonism. They presented at age 38 and 40, respectively, with bradykinesia, cogwheel rigidity, and mild pyramidal and cerebellar signs. They were unresponsive to levodopa but responded very well to trihexyphenidyl, an anticholinergic drug. Mitsui et al. (1994) proposed that this was a new hereditary variant of early-onset Parkinson disease, distinct from the levodopa-sensitive form of juvenile Parkinson disease. They commented that responsiveness to anticholinergics but not levodopa may also be seen in Joseph disease (SCA3; 109150). MRI studies demonstrated atrophy of the cerebellar hemisphere and vermis, as well as high intensity areas in both pyramidal tracts. This juxtaposition of extrapyramidal and cerebellar signs usually results in classification of a disease as a multisystem atrophy or an olivopontocerebellar degeneration and is characteristic of many adult-onset spinocerebellar atrophies, most of which are transmitted as autosomal dominant traits.
Yamamura et al. (1973) reported familial cases of juvenile parkinsonism with marked diurnal fluctuation in symptoms. The disorder was found to show nigral cell loss and occurred in a setting of inbreeding; it undoubtedly represented a subtype of autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism (Nygaard, 1993). Matsumine et al. (1998) noted that early-onset parkinsonism with diurnal fluctuation (EPDF) is also a dopa-responsive form of parkinsonism and is associated with selective degeneration in the zona compacta of the substantia nigra without Lewy body formation. A distinguishing feature of this phenotype is a benefit from sleep with lessening of parkinsonian symptoms after awakening.
Portman et al. (2001) performed PET scans on 2 brothers with early-onset parkinsonism caused by mutations in the parkin gene and found marked reduction of fluorodopa (FDOPA) uptake in the caudate and putamen. Portman et al. (2001) noted that this was a different nigrostriatal dopaminergic pattern than that found in sporadic PD, thus suggesting a different pathophysiology for the early-onset disease.
Ohsawa et al. (2005) found that 8 of 9 patients with PARK2 mutations had significantly reduced sural sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) amplitude compared to 8 patients with idiopathic Parkinson disease. However, 6 PARK2 carriers had absence of decreased vibration sense in the foot, and only 2 had subjective sensory symptoms. Two patients with a presumptive diagnosis of idiopathic PD who showed a reduced SNAP amplitude were subsequently diagnosed with PARK2 as a result of DNA analysis. Ohsawa et al. (2005) suggested that reduced SNAP amplitude in patients with PD under 60 years of age may be a diagnostic indicator of PARK2 mutations, and concluded that sensory axonal neuropathy may be a common feature of the disorder.
Pathologic Findings
Mori et al. (1998) reported neuropathologic findings in a patient with PARK2 confirmed by genetic analysis. The patient had disease onset at age 24 years and died from unrelated complications at age 62. Grossly, the substantia nigra showed marked depigmentation. Melanin-containing neurons in the pars compacta were moderately decreased, and neuronal loss and gliosis were especially marked in the ventrolateral and medial regions. Most of the remaining nigral neurons contained melanin pigments. The pars reticulata was spared. Lewy bodies were not identified. Neurofibrillary tangles and argyrophilic astrocytes were identified in the SN, the locus ceruleus, posterior hypothalamus, the hippocampus, and various cortical areas. However, the pattern was not consistent with Alzheimer disease. Tyrosine hydroxylase (191290) activity was markedly reduced in the caudate and putamen, and modestly reduced in the SN.
Hayashi et al. (2000) reported neuropathologic findings in a Japanese patient with a mutation in the PARK2 gene (602544.0002) who had previously been reported by Ishikawa and Miyatake (1995). Loss of pigmented neurons and gliosis were most pronounced in the medial and ventrolateral regions of the substantia nigra pars compacta and in the locus ceruleus. Remaining neurons had low amounts of melanin. There was mild neuronal loss and gliosis in the substantia nigra pars reticulata. No Lewy bodies were identified. Some neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques were observed in the cerebral cortex, although there was no clinical evidence of dementia.
Van de Warrenburg et al. (2001) reported a Dutch family with PARK2 confirmed by genetic analysis. Neuropathologic examination of the proband showed depigmentation of the substantia nigra, with severe loss of pigmented neurons in the pars compacta, deposition of extraneuronal melanin, and mild gliosis. No Lewy bodies or neurofibrillary tangles were seen. However, there was a diffuse spread of tau (MAPT; 157140)-positive thorn-shaped astrocytes in the caudate, putamen, and subthalamic nucleus, and a few tau-positive astrocytes in the SN.
Farrer et al. (2001) reported a patient who was compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in the PARK2 gene. At autopsy, Lewy body pathology typical of idiopathic Parkinson disease was found, which was noted to be unusual for this form of parkinsonism.
Sasaki et al. (2004) reported neuropathologic examination of a patient with Parkinson disease due to homozygous exon 3 deletion in the PARK2 gene (602544.0005). The patient had disease onset at age 33 years and died of respiratory failure at age 70. The substantia nigra showed marked depigmentation, and melanin-containing neurons of the pars compacta were moderately to severely depleted, particularly in the ventrolateral group and medial part. Some dopaminergic neurons remained, but most were atrophic, and free melanin was observed. The pars reticulata of the SN was spared. In the locus ceruleus, neurons were mildly decreased, and free melanin was seen. Lewy bodies were not observed in the SN or locus ceruleus. There were alpha-synuclein-positive and ubiquitin-positive, round or donut-shaped inclusions in the neuropils of the pedunculopontine nucleus, but no such inclusions were seen in the SN, locus ceruleus, or subthalamic nucleus. The inclusions were somewhat basophilic, distinguishing them from Lewy bodies, which show an eosinophilic tint. No immunoreactivity to phosphorylated tau was seen in any region of the brain. Sasaki et al. (2004) suggested that a functioning parkin protein may be required for Lewy body formation.



F13A1
**Factor XIIIA deficiency, 613225 (3), AR**
Factor XIII deficiency is an autosomal recessive hematologic disorder characterized by increased bleeding and poor wound healing. Most cases of congenital factor XIII deficiency result from mutation in the A subunit (Kangsadalampai et al., 1999).
Ichinose et al. (1996, 2000) proposed a classification of factor XIII deficiency: XIIIA deficiency (formerly 'type II' F13 deficiency) and XIIIB deficiency (formerly 'type I' F13 deficiency), as well as a possible combined deficiency of the 2.
Duckert et al. (1960) first described factor XIII deficiency as a congenital hemorrhagic diathesis probably due to deficiency of fibrin stabilizing factor.
Aguercif et al. (1971) described a 7-year-old French girl with factor XIII deficiency who had ecchymoses and muscular hematomas following minor trauma. Immunodiffusion showed a protein with antigenicity of factor XIII.
Kitchens and Newcomb (1979) found about 100 reported cases. Homozygotes showed umbilical stump bleeding, a high frequency of fetal wastage, soft tissue hemorrhage, and intracranial hemorrhage. The authors noted that affected males had oligospermia and small testes. Because of the long half-life of infused factor XIII and the small amounts necessary for normal hemostasis, both replacement therapy and prophylaxis were simple, effective, and relatively inexpensive.
Frydman et al. (1986) found 7 homozygotes for factor XIII deficiency in a large inbred Arab kindred. Two affected men and 1 probably affected man had children, 2 of whom were also affected. Paternity was confirmed by special tests. An affected woman had early abortions.
Standen and Bowen (1993) reported a woman with factor XIII deficiency. The patient, who was born in 1953, had a history of profuse umbilical bleeding at birth and severe hemorrhage after tonsillectomy and dental extractions in childhood. In adult life, she had suffered recurrent muscle hematomas, retroperitoneal bleeding and hemarthroses, and in 1988, had an intracranial hemorrhage which responded to fresh frozen plasma. Two pregnancies terminated in spontaneous abortion but 2 further pregnancies covered with fresh frozen plasma resulted in live offspring. For 5 years she had received factor XIII concentrate on a monthly basis and had remained well.
Kangsadalampai et al. (1999) reported a male infant, born of a consanguineous family of Syrian descent with factor XIII deficiency. He was diagnosed at age 17 months. He had a history of oozing from the umbilical cord, life-threatening retroperitoneal bleeding after urologic surgery, and a large extradural hematoma after head injury. Treatment with fresh frozen plasma and factor XIII concentrate resulted in no further bleeding episodes. Genetic analysis identified a homozygous mutation in the F13A1 gene (R260H; 134570.0009).
Birben et al. (2002) reported a consanguineous Turkish family with factor XIII deficiency. The proband was a 5-year-old girl who had bled from the umbilical cord at birth and experienced recurrent musculoskeletal hematomas. Three sibs with a history of prolonged umbilical cord bleeding at birth had died in infancy. Genetic analysis identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the F13A1 gene (134570.0014).
Souri et al. (2001) reported an Italian man with factor XIII deficiency due to mutation in the F13A1 gene (134570.0013). The patient developed a post-traumatic hematoma in the right buttock at age 9 years that required surgical drainage. A large hematoma of the right thigh developed at age 16 years, requiring repeated surgical drainage and transfusion of packed red cells and plasma several times. Plasma studies showed less than 2% of normal plasma transamidase activity, and less than 5% and 38% of normal XIIIA and XIIIB antigens, respectively. His brother also developed severe bleeding after post-traumatic splenectomy at age 21 years. His plasma had less than 2% of normal transamidase activity, and less than 5% and 41% of normal XIIIA and XIIIB antigen levels, respectively. Their parents, who were not related, were deceased.
Anwar and Langlois (2009) reported a 13-year-old boy of Canadian origin with factor XIII deficiency. He had umbilical bleeding shortly after birth. Laboratory studies showed complete lack of subunit A and reduced levels of subunit B. Genetic analysis found compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the F13A1 gene (134570.0015 and 134570.0016).
Acquired Factor XIII Deficiency
Lorand et al. (1988) discussed severe bleeding due to autoimmune antibody against factor XIII. Reaction to penicillin or to isoniazid were mentioned as causes.
**{Myocardial infarction, protection against}, 608446 (3)**
**{Venous thrombosis, protection against}, 188050 (3), AD**
Thrombophilia is a multifactorial disorder of inappropriate clot formation resulting from an interaction of genetic, acquired, and circumstantial predisposing factors. Venous thromboembolism most commonly manifests as deep vein thrombosis, which may progress to pulmonary embolism if the clot dislodges and travels to the lung. Other manifestations include thromboses of the cerebral or visceral veins and recurrent pregnancy loss (summary by Seligsohn and Lubetsky, 2001 and Varga and Kujovich, 2012).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Thrombophilia
THPH2 (188055) is caused by mutation in the F5 gene (612309) on chromosome 1q23; THPH3 (176860) and THPH4 (612304) are both caused by mutation in the PROC gene (612283) on 2q; THPH5 (612336) and THPH6 (614514) are caused by mutation in the PROS1 gene (176880) on 3q11; THPH7 (613118) is caused by mutation in the AT3 gene (107300) on 1q25; THPH8 (300807) is caused by mutation in the F9 gene (300746) on Xq27; THPH9 (612348) is associated with decreased release of tissue plasminogen activator (PLAT; 173370); THPH10 (612356) is caused by mutation in the HCF2 gene (142360) on 22q11; THPH11 (613116) is caused by mutation in the HRG gene (142640) on 3q27; and THPH12 (614486) is associated with variation in the THBD gene (188040) on 20p11.
Susceptibility to thrombosis has also been associated with variation in additional genes, including MTHFR (607093.0003); F13B (134580.0003); plasminogen activator inhibitor (SERPINE1; 173360); and several genes encoding fibrinogen (FGA, 134820; FGB, 134830; FGG, 134850). Variation in the SERPINA10 (see 605271.0001), KNG1 (612358) and HABP2 (603924) genes has also been reported.
Protection against venous thrombosis is associated with variation in the F13A1 gene (134570) on 6p25.
Miyawaki et al. (2012) reported a Japanese family, originating from Yukuhashi in the northern part of the Kyushu islands, with recurrent thrombophilia. The family had originally been reported by Sakai et al. (2001). There were at least 9 affected individuals spanning 3 generations. The proband had onset of recurrent deep vein thrombosis at age 11 years, and many affected family members had onset of deep vein thrombosis or pulmonary embolism before age 50 years.



IMPG1
**Macular dystrophy, vitelliform, 4, 616151 (3), AD**
Macular dystrophies are inherited retinal dystrophies in which various forms of deposits, pigmentary changes, and atrophic lesions are observed in the macula lutea, the cone-rich region of the central retina. Vitelliform macular dystrophies (VMDs) form a subset of macular dystrophies characterized by round yellow deposits, usually at the center of the macula and containing lipofuscin, a chemically heterogeneous pigment visualized by autofluorescence imaging of the fundus (summary by Manes et al., 2013). Vitelliform macular dystrophy-4 is characterized by late-onset moderate visual impairment, small satellite drusen-like lesions in the foveal area, preservation of retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) reflectivity, deposits above the RPE between the ellipsoid and outer segment interdigitation lines on spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), and normal or borderline results on electrooculography (EOG) (Meunier et al., 2014).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of vitelliform macular dystrophy, see VMD1 (153840).
Manes et al. (2013) examined 8 affected individuals from a large 6-generation French family with VMD. Age of onset ranged from 20 to 45 years, and mean visual acuity was 20/30. Six of the 8 individuals had a single subfoveal vitelliform lesion, and 2 individuals had several small vitelliform deposits in both eyes. In most individuals, rod responses on electroretinography (ERG) were above the lower limit, and cone responses were either normal or moderately decreased. All individuals but 1 had a normal or slightly decreased Arden ratio on EOG.



RARS2
**Pontocerebellar hypoplasia, type 6, 611523 (3), AR**
Pontocerebellar hypoplasia (PCH) is a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by an abnormally small cerebellum and brainstem and associated with severe developmental delay (Edvardson et al., 2007).
For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of PCH, see PCH1 (607596).
Edvardson et al. (2007) investigated 3 patients, the products of a consanguineous Sephardic Jewish marriage, who had infantile encephalopathy and a putative defect in mitochondrial translation. The eldest of the 3 affected children showed generalized hypotonia and poor sucking at several hours of age, and brain magnetic imaging (MRI) at age 3 days showed cerebellar and vermian hypoplasia but normal brain volume. Recurrent apnea from age 1 week was controlled by phenobarbital, but intractable seizures starting at age 2 months were resistant to multidrug therapy. Microcephaly became evident at age 1 year. No developmental milestones were attained, and muscle tone became spastic. The results of funduscopic observations were normal. Serial brain MRI revealed progressive atrophy of the cerebellum, pons, cerebral cortex, and white matter. The patient died at age 16 months. Activities of mitochondrial complexes I, III, and IV in muscle from this patient were markedly reduced, but activity of complex II was relatively preserved. The fourth child in the family and the second to be affected was a boy who was markedly hypotonic and lethargic from birth. He was found dead in his crib at age 7 weeks. The fifth child in the family and the third to be affected was normal on neurologic examination on the first day of life, but an apneic episode occurred on the second day. At age 3 weeks, poor feeding, lethargy, and generalized hypotonia became evident. At 4 months, she developed generalized seizures, and head growth was arrested. Brain MRI at age 3 months revealed general atrophy, with most marked changes in the pons and cerebellum.
Rankin et al. (2010) reported a girl, born of unrelated British parents, with PCH6. After a normal birth, she was admitted after 19 hours with poor feeding and high respiratory rate. Laboratory studies showed increased serum lactate, which resolved with treatment. She later developed severe hypotonia, myoclonic seizures, profound developmental delay with absence of social smiling and poor head control, and poor feeding requiring gastrostomy. Brain MRI at age 14 months showed generalized cerebral atrophy, thinning of the pons, and atrophy of the cerebellar hemispheres. Examination at age 2 and 3 years showed severe progressive microcephaly and dysmorphic features, such as bitemporal narrowing, deep-set eyes with prominent nasal bridge, full cheeks, and narrow palate. She also had edematous hands and feet, and required a tracheostomy for upper airway obstruction due to hypotonia. Muscle biopsy showed normal respiratory chain activity. Rankin et al. (2010) noted some phenotypic overlap with PEHO syndrome (260565), but their patient lacked optic atrophy.
Li et al. (2015) reported 2 Hispanic sibs with PCH6. Both presented in the first year of life with hypotonia and delayed psychomotor development after normal early development in the first months of life. Variable features included head lag or poor head control, weak reflexes that progressed to increased reflexes, and dysconjugate eye movements. The brother developed seizures at age 9 months. At age 4.5 years, he had microcephaly, progressive visual loss, no functional speech, refractory seizures, clinodactyly, and adducted thumb, and he required tube feeding. Brain imaging showed small posterior fossa, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, small pons, cerebellar atrophy, and increased subarachnoid space over the frontotemporal regions. The sister was less severely affected: at age 18 months, she was able to sit with support and had started to babble; brain imaging showed cerebellar hypoplasia. She did not have seizures or visual loss.



PMS2
**Colorectal cancer, hereditary nonpolyposis, type 4, 614337 (3)**
Nicolaides et al. (1994) identified a germline deletion in the PMS2 gene in a patient with a family history of HNPCC. A second deletion was found in the patient's tumor sample. The tumor from this patient exhibited microsatellite instability.
To examine the contribution of the PMS2 and EXO1 (606063) genes to the HNPCC disease phenotype, Thompson et al. (2004) studied 21 families negative for mutations in MSH2 (609309) and MLH1 (120436) that fulfilled the Amsterdam diagnostic criteria. They found that mutation in PMS2 accounts for only a small proportion of HNPCC families.
Worthley et al. (2005) tested a cohort of 80 patients with features suggestive of HNPCC for evidence of defective mismatch repair and exclusive loss of expression of the PMS2 gene in the tumor. They identified a family with HNPCC due to autosomal dominant inheritance of a loss-of-function mutation in the PMS2 gene and stated that this was the first description of such a kindred. The proband had been diagnosed with cancer of the transverse colon at 49 years of age. Two years later he developed and subsequently died of metastatic esophageal adenocarcinoma. His mother developed endometrial cancer at 60 years of age and carcinoma of the cecum at age 80 years. His maternal grandfather and great-uncle developed colorectal cancer at 66 and 45 years of age, respectively. The brother of the proband had 2 sessile polyps removed from the sigmoid colon, 1 at age 47 and the other at age 49. A maternal uncle died of metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus, and his daughter developed breast cancer at the age of 25 years.
Hendriks et al. (2006) summarized the phenotype of 7 families with colorectal cancer and a truncating mutation in the PMS2 gene. Although only 3 of the 7 families fulfilled the Amsterdam criteria, in 6 of the 7 families, the pattern of inheritance appeared to be autosomal dominant. The most frequently observed cancer in proven mutation carriers was colorectal carcinoma, followed by endometrial carcinoma and ovarian carcinoma. The mean age at diagnosis was 52 years, approximately 7 to 8 years higher than the mean age of diagnosis observed in families associated with MLH1 and MSH2 mutations. Hendriks et al. (2006) hypothesized that the attenuated phenotype of families with PMS2 mutations may be explained by the fact that in the absence of PMS2, a functional MLH1 and MLH3 (604395) heterodimeric protein can be formed that is able to repair DNA mismatches. In families with MLH1 or MSH2 gene defects, no alternative heterodimers can be created, with consequently a complete inactivation of the mismatch repair system with massive microsatellite instability and a higher risk of cancer.
Goodenberger et al. (2016) examined the penetrance and presentation of colorectal cancer in 234 monoallelic PMS2 mutation carriers from 170 families. Approximately 8% of those with colorectal cancer were diagnosed before age 30, and each of these tumors presented on the left side of the colon. As it was unknown what causes the early onset of colorectal cancer in some families with monoallelic PMS2 germline mutations, the authors recommended against reducing cancer surveillance guidelines in families found to have monoallelic PMS2 mutations, in spite of the reduced penetrance (15-20%, according to Senter et al. (2008)).
**Mismatch repair cancer syndrome, 276300 (3), AR**
Mismatch repair cancer syndrome (MMRCS) is a rare autosomal recessive childhood cancer predisposition syndrome with 4 main tumor types: hematologic malignancies, brain/central nervous system tumors, colorectal tumors and multiple intestinal polyps, and other malignancies including embryonic tumors and rhabdomyosarcoma. Many patients show signs reminiscent of neurofibromatosis type I (NF1; 162200), particularly multiple cafe-au-lait macules (summary by Baas et al., 2013).
Wimmer and Etzler (2008) provided a review of the mismatch cancer repair syndrome and suggested that the prevalence may be underestimated.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Mismatch Repair Cancer Syndrome
MMRCS2 (619096) is caused by mutation in the MSH2 gene (609309) on chromosome 2p21-p16. MMRCS3 (619097) is caused by mutation in the MSH6 gene (600678) on chromosome 2p16. MMRCS4 (619101) is caused by mutation in the PMS2 gene (600259) on chromosome 7p22.
Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP; 175100), an autosomal dominant disorder that results from heterozygous mutations in the APC gene, may also develop brain tumors or extracolonic malignancies, resulting in a similar clinical phenotype.
Heterozygous mutations in the MMR genes result in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (see, e.g., HNPCC1, 120435).
Turcot et al. (1959) reported a brother and sister with malignant tumors of the central nervous system associated with colonic polyps. The brother had a medulloblastoma of the spinal cord and colorectal adenocarcinomas; the sister had glioblastoma multiforme and a pituitary adenoma. The parents were third cousins, indicating autosomal recessive inheritance (Turcot, 1961). Turcot, a French Canadian, pronounced his name with a silent terminal 't'.
Yaffee (1964) described a patient with Gardner syndrome (see 175100), a variant of FAP with extracolonic manifestations, whose uncle 'died of Turcot syndrome.' The report suggested that the 2 phenotypes are similar and may be confused.
Baughman et al. (1969) reported a family in which a brother, 2 sisters, and possibly another brother had glioma and colonic polyposis inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. The authors referred to it as 'the glioma-polyposis syndrome.'
Everson and Fraumeni (1976) described 2 sibs who died from glioblastoma multiforme associated with focal nodular hyperplasia of the liver and cafe-au-lait spots. One sib had 4 adenomatous sigmoid polyps removed at age 22. No further colonic polyps were found on autopsy.
Itoh et al. (1979) described 2 sisters, born of first-cousin parents, with malignant cerebral neoplasms and colonic polyposis. One sister presented at age 19 with multiple colonic polyps for which colectomy was performed. At the age of 22, she presented with a grade 3 astrocytoma of the left frontal lobe, from which she eventually died. She had several cafe-au-lait spots. The younger sister was found at age 17 to have colonic adenomas, including adenocarcinoma in 2 large polyps, and 14 small primary gastric cancers, all of the signet ring cell type. She had total gastrectomy and total colectomy. She had several cafe-au-lait spots and 3 small lipomas. At the age of 21, she was found to have a grade 3 astrocytoma of the right temporal lobe, from which she eventually died. Panoramic radiographs of the jaws and radiologic survey of the skeleton showed no abnormality suggestive of Gardner syndrome.
From study of their own cases and those in the literature, Itoh et al. (1979) concluded that in the Turcot syndrome polyps are somewhat fewer in number than in FAP, but are generally larger in size. The ratio of polyps over 3 cm in diameter to all polyps was frequently more than 1% in Turcot syndrome, but usually less than 0.2% in FAP. The authors collected reports of 12 families plus several nonfamilial cases of Turcot syndrome. Bussey (1975) referred to a recessive form of FAP. Itoh et al. (1979) observed cases of this apparent type and found that the polyposis was of the Turcot type in terms of number and size.
Michels and Stevens (1982) reported a 22-year-old female with multiple polyposis of the colon requiring colectomy at age 17, multiple basal cell carcinoma in the scalp first presenting at age 18, pontine glioma presenting at age 19, and a tumor of the left posterior parietal region, either a second primary tumor or metastatic adenocarcinoma of the colon; invasive adenocarcinoma had been found in the colon specimen. She also had multiple pigmented lesions on the back and arms. A sister died of cerebral glioma at age 8. The authors postulated autosomal recessive inheritance.
Li et al. (1983) reported a woman who developed colonic polyposis and carcinoma at the age of 31 years, and astrocytoma at age 37. Her brother and sister had died of astrocytoma at ages 18 and 33 years, respectively. Progressive neutropenia developed 3 months after radiotherapy for the brain tumor and acute myelomonocytic leukemia developed 19 months after treatment, suggesting radiosensitivity. Studies of cultured skin fibroblasts in 3 laboratories showed slight but significant radiosensitivity in an early passage subculture (after 6 to 10 doublings), but no abnormality in later subculture (after 21 to 29 doublings). Selective in vitro loss of radiosensitive cells may have accounted for the normality of later subcultures.
In a review of reported cases of Turcot syndrome, Van Meir (1998) found that non-FAP patients with glioblastoma had onset before age 26 years and average survival of 27 months, which is longer than that for sporadic glioblastoma.
Ricciardone et al. (1999) reported 3 Turkish sibs who developed hematologic malignancy at a very early age, 2 of whom displayed signs of NF1. All 3 children were diagnosed with a hematological malignancy by the age of 3 years (leukemia in 2 and non-Hodgkin lymphoma in 1). Two of the children had more than 10 cafe-au-lait spots, and 1 child had 2 fibromatous skin tumors.
Hamilton et al. (1995) analyzed 14 families with the clinical designation of 'Turcot syndrome' identified in 2 registries, and the family originally described by Turcot et al. (1959). Studies on autopsy slides of the glioblastoma and rectal adenoma from 1 of the cases reported by Turcot et al. (1959) showed DNA replication errors characteristic of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC; see 120435). Tissue samples from patients with mismatch repair (MMR) mutations showed DNA replication errors. Ten of 12 families classified as having polyposis were found to have heterozygous mutations in the APC gene (611731), indicating that they had familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP; see 175100) with the extracolonic manifestation of a brain tumor, mainly medulloblastoma (in 79%). One patient (family 14) was found to have a mutation in the MLH1 gene (MMRCS1); he was a 39-year-old male who had adenocarcinoma of the ascending and transverse colon at age 30 years, adenomas of the descending and sigmoid colon at age 32 and 33 years, respectively, and an ilieal adenocarcinoma at age 33, as well as transitional cell carcinoma of the ureter. He was found to have glioblastoma at age 33 years.
Baas et al. (2013) reported 3 unrelated children with MMRCS and structural brain anomalies. Patient 2, with MMRCS1, was a boy, born of Polynesian parents, who first presented with a glioblastoma multiforme and later developed a T-cell lymphoblastic lymphoma. He died of sepsis at the end of treatment. Brain imaging showed near complete agenesis of the corpus callosum, interhemispheric and intracerebral cysts, and right subcortical and periventricular heterotopia. He was also noted to have multiple cafe-au-lait spots. Early developmental milestones were delayed. The maternal family history was positive for colorectal cancer. See MMRCS4 (619101) for discussion of the other 2 patients.



AUTS2
**Mental retardation, autosomal dominant 26, 615834 (3), AD**
Beunders et al. (2013) compared 17 well-characterized individuals with exonic deletions in AUTS2 and found a variable syndromic phenotype, including intellectual disability, autism, short stature, microcephaly, cerebral palsy, and facial dysmorphisms. Beunders et al. (2013) found that all 17 probands for whom clinical data were available had intellectual disability and/or developmental delay; this had been the reason for diagnostic testing. One of the parents carrying an AUTS2 deletion had learning difficulties, 1 had mild intellectual disability, and 1 had normal intelligence. Seven of the 17 probands were diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder or showed autistic behavior. Among the complete cohort of 21 individuals consisting of 17 probands and 4 family members carrying the AUTS2 deletion, 13 females and 8 males ranging in age from 11 months to 32 years at the time of examination, Beunders et al. (2013) observed low birthweight in 41% (7/17), short stature in 60% (12/20), microcephaly in 70% (14/20), and feeding difficulties in 48% (10/21). Only 14% (3/21) manifested hyperactivity disorder and/or ADHD. Thirty-eight percent (8/21) were hypotonic, 27% (3/11) had a structural brain anomaly, and 43% (9/21) had cerebral palsy and/or spasticity. Dysmorphic features noted by Beunders et al. (2013) included hypertelorism, ptosis, short and/or upturned philtrum, short palpebral fissures, prominent nasal tip, and narrow mouth. Skeletal abnormalities included kyphosis and/or scoliosis, arthrogryposis and/or shallow palmar creases, and tight heel cords. Beunders et al. (2013) developed an AUTS2 syndrome severity score. Cases and family members with 5-prime in-frame deletions scored significantly lower than did cases and family members with deletions of downstream exons, whole-gene deletions, or exon 1 through 4 deletions, including the initiation codon. This difference was significant, regardless of the inclusion or exclusion of affected family members, prompting further analysis of the 3-prime gene region of AUTS2.
Nagamani et al. (2013) reported 4 patients with copy number variations (CNVs) ranging in size from 133 to 319 kb that disrupted AUTS2. Two patients were sibs who inherited an identical 179-kb duplication of exon 5 from their mother. The other 2 patients had different intragenic deletions that involved exons 6 through 14. All patients had developmental delay. Both of the patients with the duplication had autism spectrum disorder. One had microcephaly, while the other was normocephalic; the normocephalic patient had seizures. The mother of these patients had microcephaly and mild intellectual disability. One deletion patient had macrocephaly, dysmorphic facial features, failure to thrive, scoliosis, and atrial septal defect; brain MRI was normal. Her 133-kb deletion arose de novo. The second deletion patient had a head circumference in the 11th percentile at 3 years of age. She had no features of autism or seizures, and brain MRI was normal. Her deletion, which was 319 kb, encompassed that of the other patient.
Beunders et al. (2015) reported 2 unrelated males in their twenties with MRD26. Both patients had delayed psychomotor development with intellectual disability, an autism spectrum disorder, feeding difficulties after birth, mild distal joint contractures, and mild dysmorphic features. Dysmorphic features included ptosis, prominent nasal tip, deep nasal bridge, and short or upturned philtrum. One patient had severely delayed speech and foot misalignment requiring surgery. The other also had short stature, highly arched eyebrows, short palpebral fissures, strabismus, low-set ears, microretrognathia, highly arched feet, and stiff movements with mild peripheral hypertonia. The clinical features, although slightly variable, were consistent with those reported previously in patients with MRD26.
Beunders et al. (2016) reported 13 patients, including 6 adults, with an intellectual disability syndrome caused by mutation in the AUTS2 gene. Three of the patients had previously been reported and were reevaluated. All patients had developmental delay and borderline to severe intellectual disability with poor speech. Most had microcephaly and feeding difficulties early in life due to hypotonia. Congenital malformations were rare, but mild heart defects, contractures, and genital malformations occurred occasionally. Motor development was slightly delayed, and many had hyperreflexia or hypertonia. Only 2 had seizures. Most individuals tended to have friendly, outgoing social interactions; some features of autism were often observed, but none were diagnosed with classic autism. Patients with a small in-frame 5-prime deletion, which was often inherited, had a milder phenotype compared to those with haploinsufficiency of the full-length AUTS2 transcript, which occurred de novo.



SEMA3A
**{Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism 16 with or without anosmia}, 614897 (3), AD**
Congenital idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) is a disorder characterized by absent or incomplete sexual maturation by the age of 18 years, in conjunction with low levels of circulating gonadotropins and testosterone and no other abnormalities of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. Idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism can be caused by an isolated defect in gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GNRH; 152760) release, action, or both. Other associated nonreproductive phenotypes, such as anosmia, cleft palate, and sensorineural hearing loss, occur with variable frequency. In the presence of anosmia, idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism has been called 'Kallmann syndrome (KS),' whereas in the presence of a normal sense of smell, it has been termed 'normosmic idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (nIHH)' (summary by Raivio et al., 2007). Because families have been found to segregate both KS and nIHH, the disorder is here referred to as 'hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with or without anosmia (HH).'
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism with or without anosmia as well as a discussion of oligogenicity of this disorder, see 147950.
Young et al. (2012) studied a family segregating autosomal dominant anosmic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The proband presented at 17 years of age because of pubertal failure, and was found to have features of complete hypogonadism, with mean testicular volume of 2.5 mL and right cryptorchidism; he did not have micropenis. Olfactometry showed hyposmia, and MRI revealed bilateral hypoplasia of the olfactory bulbs, with normal hypothalamus and pituitary. He had very low serum levels of testosterone, LH (152780), and FSH (136530), and the 2 gonadotropins responded only weakly to GnRH challenge. His sister presented at 18 years of age for primary amenorrhea and pubertal failure (Tanner breast stage I). She had very low serum levels of estradiol, LH, and FSH, and was anosmic. Their father had been evaluated for pubertal failure associated with hyposmic HH at 19 years of age. At age 21, he began treatment with replacement GnRH with normalization of gonadotropin and testosterone levels; androgen therapy resulted in satisfactory virilization, but after 5 years his testicular volume was still low and he was azoospermic. Injections with hMG and hCG resulted in induction of spermatogenesis and fertility. Reexamination 6 months after stopping testosterone replacement therapy at 54 years of age showed persistence of his congenital gonadotropin deficiency, with low testicular volume and low gonadotropin and testosterone levels. Family interviews revealed that the father had 2 paternal aunts who also had anosmia, absent pubertal development, and infertility, and his deceased father had isolated anosmia, with normal puberty and fertility without medical assistance.



MCPH1
**Microcephaly 1, primary, autosomal recessive, 251200 (3), AR**
Primary microcephaly refers to the clinical finding of a head circumference more than than 3 standard deviations (SD) below the age- and sex-related mean, present at birth. Primary microcephaly is a static developmental anomaly, distinguished from secondary microcephaly, which refers to a progressive neurodegenerative condition. Microcephaly is a disorder of fetal brain growth; individuals with microcephaly have small brains and almost always have mental retardation, although rare individuals with mild microcephaly (-3 SD) and normal intelligence have been reported. Additional clinical features may include short stature or mild seizures. MCPH is associated with a simplification of the cerebral cortical gyral pattern and a slight reduction in the volume of the white matter, consistent with the small size of the brain, but the architecture of the brain in general is normal, with no evidence of a neuronal migration defect (review by Woods et al., 2005).
Most cases of primary microcephaly show an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. Because MCPH directly affects neurogenesis, or neurogenic mitosis, rather than growth of the skull, some prefer the term 'micrencephaly' (Hofman, 1984).
MCPH1 in particular is associated with premature chromosome condensation in cell studies (Darvish et al., 2010).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Primary Microcephaly
Primary microcephaly is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. See MCPH2 (604317), caused by mutation in the WDR62 gene (613583) on chromosome 19q13; MCPH3 (604804), caused by mutation in the CDK5RAP2 gene (608201) on 9q33; MCPH4 (604321), caused by mutation in the CASC5 gene (609173) on 15q14; MCPH5 (608716), caused by mutation in the ASPM gene (605481) on 1q31; MCPH6 (608393), caused by mutation in the CENPJ gene (609279) on 13q12; MCPH7 (612703), caused by mutation in the STIL gene (181590) on 1p33; MCPH8 (614673), caused by mutation in the CEP135 gene (611423) on 4q12; MCPH9 (614852), caused by mutation in the CEP152 gene (613529) on 15q21; MCPH10 (615095), caused by mutation in the ZNF335 gene (610827) on 20q13; MCPH11 (615414), caused by mutation in the PHC1 gene (602978) on 12p13; MCPH12 (616080), caused by mutation in the CDK6 gene (603368) on 7q21; MCPH13 (616051), caused by mutation in the CENPE gene (117143) on 4q24; MCPH14 (616402), caused by mutation in the SASS6 gene (609321) on 1p21; MCPH15 (616486), caused by mutation in the MFSD2A gene (614397) on 1p34; MCPH16 (616681), caused by mutation in the ANKLE2 gene (616062) on 12q24; MCPH17 (617090), caused by mutation in the CIT gene (605629) on 12q24; MCPH18 (617520), caused by mutation in the WDFY3 gene (617485) on 4q21; and MCPH19 (617800), caused by mutation in the COPB2 gene (606990) on 3q23; MCPH20 (617914), caused by mutation in the KIF14 gene (611279) on 1q31; MCPH21 (617983), caused by mutation in the NCAPD2 gene (615638) on 12p13; MCPH22 (617984), caused by mutation in the NCAPD3 gene (609276) on 11q25; MCPH23 (617985), caused by mutation in the NCAPH gene (602332) on 2q11; MCPH24 (618179), caused by mutation in the NUP37 gene (609264) on 12q23; and MCPH25 (618351), caused by mutation in the MAP11 gene (618350) on 7q22.
Primary or true microcephaly is different from microcephaly secondary to degenerative brain disorder (Cowie, 1960). In true microcephaly, there is no neurologic defect, other than mental deficiency, and no skeletal or other malformation. The differentiation of primary and secondary microcephaly was investigated by Qazi and Reed (1973). In a biometric analysis of brain size of micrencephalics compared to normal controls, Hofman (1984) found that micrencephalics have a significantly lower brain weight in adolescence than in early childhood, and that this cerebral dystrophy continues throughout adulthood, leading to death in more than 85% of males and 78% of females before age 30 years. Since this decline in brain weight is not accompanied by a similar reduction in head circumference, the brains of elderly micrencephalic individuals no longer occupy the entire cranial cavity. Hofman (1984) concluded that head circumference is an unsuitable parameter for estimating brain size in micrencephaly.
Mikati et al. (1985) reported microcephaly associated with short stature and mental retardation in 3 brothers and a sister out of 9 children of first-cousin parents. Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and a variety of minor anomalies were also present.
Tolmie et al. (1987) described the clinical and genetic findings of a series of microcephalic patients referred to the Genetic Counselling Service for the West of Scotland. There were 29 isolated cases and 9 families with recurrent microcephaly. The sib recurrence risk of 19% was taken to reflect the high incidence of autosomal recessive microcephaly. In this series, there appeared to be several varieties of recessive microcephaly. The most frequent, affecting 5 sib pairs, was associated with spastic quadriplegia, seizures, and profound mental handicap. In 15 families with 1 microcephalic child, prenatal diagnosis by serial ultrasound scans was undertaken in 21 subsequent pregnancies. Four recurrences were detected in the third trimester and 1 recurrence was missed because no scan was performed after 24 weeks gestation when the ultrasound measurements indicated satisfactory head growth. The main reason for late diagnosis was that head growth did not slow appreciably until the last trimester.
Although Qazi and Reed (1975) stated that carriers of primary microcephaly have diminished intelligence, Pattison et al. (2000) noted that this had not been seen in any of the families in with linkage to specific MCPH loci had been reported.
Bond et al. (2005) emphasized that MCPH is evident at birth, with head circumference ranging between 4 and 12 standard deviations below the mean and thereafter remaining proportionately small with age. Cognitive functions are reduced, but epilepsy and other neurologic disorders or decline are rarely reported, and motor skills are preserved. It is hypothesized that neuronal precursor cells in the neuroepithelium are affected, resulting in reduced production of functional neurons during fetal life.
Darvish et al. (2010) reported 8 unrelated consanguineous families from Iran with primary microcephaly-1. Head circumference of affected individuals ranged from -3 to -11 SD, and mental retardation ranged from mild to severe. Karyotype analysis of 1 affected individual from each family showed curly chromosomes with a high level of breakage. There were also increased numbers of prophase looking cells (80%), compared to control (13%). The features were consistent with premature chromosome condensation.
Tommerup et al. (1993) reported a Danish girl, born of consanguineous parents, with microcephaly, craniosynostosis, ptosis, bird-like facies with micrognathia, and moderate mental retardation, associated with a highly increased frequency of spontaneous chromosome breakage. In addition, unique cellular features included endomitosis and hypersensitivity to clastogenic agents as observed in phytohemagglutinin-stimulated peripheral lymphocytes. Both the alkylating agent Trenimon and the radiomimetic drug bleomycin produced an abnormal frequency of changes. Abnormal chromosomal spiralization and some aspects of abnormal cellular division were also observed. In the patient reported by Tommerup et al. (1993), Farooq et al. (2010) identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the MCPH1 gene (S101X; 607117.0007), thus widening the phenotypic spectrum of MCPH1-related diseases.



TMEM67
**{Bardet-Biedl syndrome 14, modifier of}, 615991 (3), AR**
BBS14 is an autosomal recessive ciliopathy described in a single patient with features of retinitis pigmentosa, obesity, mental retardation, and renal disease (Leitch et al., 2008).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Bardet-Biedl syndrome, see BBS1 (209900).
**COACH syndrome, 216360 (3), AR**
COACH syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by impaired intellectual development, ataxia due to cerebellar hypoplasia, and hepatic fibrosis. Other features, such as coloboma and renal cysts, may be variable. COACH syndrome is considered by some to be a subtype of Joubert syndrome (JBTS; see 213300) with congenital hepatic fibrosis. Identification of liver disease in these patients is critical because some may develop complications such as portal hypertension with fatal variceal bleeding (Brancati et al., 2009; Doherty et al., 2010).
Genetic Heterogeneity of COACH Syndrome
Also see COACH syndrome-2 (COACH2; 619111), caused by mutation in in the CC2D2A gene (612013), and COACH syndrome-3 (COACH3; 619113), caused by mutation the RPGRIP1L gene (610937).
Most cases of COACH syndrome are caused by mutation in the TMEM67 gene.
Verloes and Lambotte (1989) described 3 affected children in 2 sibships. In 1 of the families with an affected boy and girl, the parents were consanguineous. The features were early-onset ataxia with hypo/aplastic vermis, hepatic fibrocirrhosis, slender skeleton, peculiar face, and moderate mental retardation. Verloes and Lambotte (1989) concluded that the disorder is different from Joubert syndrome (see 213300), including the form associated with chorioretinal coloboma (243910), due to the lack of hepatic involvement in those disorders. In 2 sibs reported by Verloes and Lambotte (1989), Brancati et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the TMEM67 gene (609884.0013-609884.0014). Additional clinical features included hypotonia, nystagmus, coloboma, and nephronophthisis with renal failure.
Wiesner et al. (1992) described adult sibs with this disorder. Postmortem in the sister, who died at age 46, showed distorted biliary ducts and multiple small medullary renal cysts. Because changes in the liver suggested biliary ductal proliferation, a trial of ursodiol was initiated in the younger brother with benefit. Wiesner et al. (1992) suggested that biliary proliferation is a manifestation of hepatic fibrosis in this disorder.
Gentile et al. (1996) reported 2 brothers of Italian descent with COACH syndrome. Clinical features included mental retardation, cerebellar ataxia with hypoplasia of the inferior vermis, visual impairment with nystagmus and oculomotor apraxia, and congenital hepatic fibrosis with abundant bile ductules. From birth, both children showed developmental delay and hypotonia. One child required liver transplantation. Mild dysmorphic facial feature were also described, including hypertelorism, frontal bossing, anteverted nostrils, and downslanting palpebral fissures. Gentile et al. (1996) noted the phenotypic overlap with Joubert and Meckel syndromes. In the patients reported by Gentile et al. (1996), Brancati et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the TMEM67 gene (609884.0016-609884.0017).
Kumar and Rankin (1996) described 2 sisters, aged 23 years and 6 years, who were found to have congenital ataxia, bilateral coloboma, of the optic nerves, mental retardation, and abnormal liver function. Magnetic resonance imaging showed cerebellar vermis hypoplasia in the younger girl and liver biopsy showed hepatic fibrosis in the older sister. In addition to previously described findings typical of COACH syndrome, the older of the patients showed progressive renal insufficiency with fibrocystic changes on renal biopsy. They suggested that COACH syndrome may have been the diagnosis in the family reported by Dieterich and Straub (1980).
Foell et al. (2002) described a child with profound cholestatic liver disease and COACH syndrome. At 2.5 months of age, the child was found to have cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and a unilateral optic nerve coloboma. Routine liver function testing at 5 months of age showed elevated liver enzymes. Liver biopsy at 16 months of age showed an early stage of cirrhosis with septal fibrosis and pseudolobules, inflammatory infiltrates, signs of cholestasis, and reduced numbers of intrahepatic bile ducts. There were no signs of kidney involvement.
Brancati et al. (2009) defined COACH syndrome as a subtype of Joubert syndrome with congenital hepatic fibrosis. They identified 14 families with this constellation of features, including 1 of the original families with COACH syndrome reported by Verloes and Lambotte (1989). Clinical features of all families included moderate to severe mental retardation and liver disease, which varied from hepatomegaly and fluctuating liver enzymes to severe fibrosis with portal hypertension and esophageal variceal bleeding. All also had cerebellar vermis hypo- or aplasia, and all with brain MRI showed the molar tooth sign. Other features included developmental delay, hypotonia, oculomotor apraxia (75%), coloboma (42%), nystagmus, ataxia, and hyperreflexia (42%). Three patients (25%) had a severe malformation of the posterior fossa, with global cerebellar hypoplasia associated with cystic dilatation of the cisterna magna communicating with the fourth ventricle. Less common features included seizures (17%), choreodystonic movements (17%), nephronophthisis (33%), and breathing abnormalities (33%). In 1 family, a second pregnancy was terminated after prenatal ultrasound showed features consistent with Meckel syndrome, including occipital encephalocele and polydactyly.
Doherty et al. (2010) reported 23 families with COACH syndrome, defined as Joubert syndrome with clinically apparent liver disease. The mean age of examination was 9 years (range, 0-22 years). Invariant features included developmental delay, intellectual disability, hypotonia, and abnormal eye movements. Congenital hepatic fibrosis as ascertained by histology was confirmed in 18 (63%) of 26 cases. Although there were no deaths from liver disease, 4 (17%) had portal hypertension and 2 (8%) needed a liver transplant. Colobomata were present in 17 (71%) and renal disease was present in 10 (42%), including 5 with nephronophthisis and 6 with macrocystic kidney disease. Three (13%) had chronic renal insufficiency or end stage renal disease and 2 (8%) needed renal transplantation. Additional features included encephalocele (4%), abnormal respiratory control (80%), hypoplasia/agenesis of the corpus callosum (8%), ptosis (25%), and intestinal malrotation (8%). None had polydactyly or retinal dystrophy. Importantly, coloboma was not an invariant feature of COACH syndrome.
**Joubert syndrome 6, 610688 (3), AR**
Joubert syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder presenting with psychomotor delay, hypotonia, ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, and neonatal breathing abnormalities. Neuroradiologically, Joubert syndrome is characterized by peculiar malformation of the midbrain-hindbrain junction known as the 'molar tooth sign' (MTS) consisting of cerebellar vermis hypoplasia or aplasia, thick and maloriented superior cerebellar peduncles, and abnormally deep interpeduncular fossa (Romano et al., 2006).
For a phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Joubert syndrome, see 213300.
Baala et al. (2007) identified a genetically distinct form of Joubert syndrome designated JBTS6. Two of the patients had been described by Romano et al. (2006). One, a 14-year-old girl, was severely handicapped and presented with hypotonia, severe mental retardation, stereotypic movements, and no independent walking. She had breathing abnormalities but no oculomotor apraxia or abnormal eye movements, and no renal or hepatic involvement. The other, a mildly affected 7-year-old girl, presented with hypotonia, ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, and abnormal eye movements. She had no breathing abnormalities or retinal, renal, or hepatic involvement. She had mild motor delay and moderate mental retardation. The third patient was a 7-year-old boy presenting developmental delay, cerebellar ataxia, abnormal breathing, and vermis agenesis. No MRI was performed; the association of hyperechogenic kidneys with cysts and severe hepatic involvement with vermis agenesis led to the diagnosis of Joubert syndrome.
In a comprehensive study of 279 patients from 232 unrelated families with Joubert syndrome in whom a genetic basis was determined by molecular analysis of 27 candidate genes, Bachmann-Gagescu et al. (2015) found a significant association between mutations in the TMEM67 gene and liver fibrosis (odds ratio (OR) of 17.3) and coloboma (OR of 22.9). In addition, there was a negative correlation between TMEM67 mutations and retinal disease (OR of 0.1).
**Meckel syndrome 3, 607361 (3), AR**
Meckel syndrome is an autosomal recessive pre- or perinatal lethal malformation syndrome characterized by renal cystic dysplasia and variably associated features including developmental anomalies of the central nervous system (typically occipital encephalocele), hepatic ductal dysplasia and cysts, and postaxial polydactyly (summary by Smith et al., 2006).
For a more complete phenotypic description and information on genetic heterogeneity of Meckel syndrome, see MKS1 (249000).
Morgan et al. (2002) stated that comparison of the clinical features of MKS3-linked cases with reports of MKS1- and MKS2 (603194)-linked kindreds suggested that polydactyly, and possibly encephalocele, are less common in MKS3-linked families.
Consugar et al. (2007) observed that polydactyly and occipital encephalocele were less common in MKS3 compared to MKS1.
**Nephronophthisis 11, 613550 (3), AR**
Boichis et al. (1973) described an association of nephronophthisis and congenital hepatic fibrosis in sibs. Five had demonstrated renal disease. Two died of renal failure at ages 7 and 15, and a third was maintained on hemodialysis. Approximately 5% of patients with NPHP have hepatic fibrosis (Otto et al., 2009).
Otto et al. (2009) described a consanguineous Turkish family in which 3 sibs had nephronophthisis and hepatic fibrosis. The diagnosis of NPHP was based on (1) characteristic clinical signs of NPHP including chronic renal failure, polyuria, polydipsia, anemia, and growth retardation; (2) renal ultrasound or renal biopsy compatible with the diagnosis; and (3) a pedigree compatible with autosomal recessive inheritance. After initial investigation, several other affected individuals were identified from a larger cohort of 60 probands. All patients developed end-stage renal disease (ESRD) between the age of 6 and 14 years and all had liver fibrosis. Three patients had ocular symptoms, including strabismus/nystagmus, retinal degeneration, and anisocoria, respectively. Patients had no or only mild neurologic involvement, and none had brain MRI abnormalities. One patient had mild 'statomotoric' retardation and another had psychomotor retardation.
**?RHYNS syndrome, 602152 (3), AR**
RHYNS syndrome is characterized by gaze palsy, retinitis pigmentosa, sensorineural hearing loss, hypopituitarism, nephronophthisis, and mild skeletal dysplasia (Di Rocco et al., 1997).
Di Rocco et al. (1997) reported a 17.5-year-old boy who at birth was noted to have right-sided ptosis and right exotropia, and left esotropia (Brancati et al., 2018). At age 4 years, short stature prompted endocrine evaluation that revealed poor response to stimulation for both growth hormone (GH1; 139250) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; see 188540). He also had severe bone-age retardation and exhibited mild signs of skeletal dysplasia, including generalized osteopenia, epiphyseal hypoplasia, hypoplastic iliac bones with irregular acetabular margins, and thin tubular bones. At age 10, left-sided 'transmissive' deafness was diagnosed, and at age 11 he was found to have retinitis pigmentosa (RP), with completely extinguished electroretinograms (ERGs) bilaterally. At 12 years of age, the proband developed progressive renal failure, and renal biopsy at age 16 was consistent with nephronophthisis. The authors noted that a similarly affected child had been described by Bianchi et al. (1988); that patient, who had ptosis, RP, juvenile nephronophthisis, hypopituitarism, skeletal anomalies, and liver disease, died at age 10 from renal failure. Di Rocco et al. (1997) designated the syndrome 'RHYNS,' for retinitis pigmentosa, hypopituitarism, nephronophthisis, and skeletal dysplasia.
Hedera and Gorski (2001) described 2 brothers, ages 14 years and 10 years, who had early onset RP, short stature with GH deficiency, mild facial asymmetry, and acromelic shortening of the distal extremities. One brother also exhibited bilateral ptosis and esotropia of the left eye. Neither brother showed signs of renal disease. The authors suggested that the phenotype was consistent with RHYNS syndrome.
Brancati et al. (2018) restudied the Italian patient with RHYNS syndrome who was originally reported by Di Rocco et al. (1997). At age 38 years, he exhibited short stature and severe generalized osteoporosis. Skeletal survey showed moderately shortened long bones, bowed radii, short femoral neck, brachydactyly of the hands and feet with more severe involvement of middle phalanges, distal phalanx of the thumbs, and metacarpals, moderately thickened calvarium, and rotoscoliosis. There was diffuse reduction of the bone density with thinning of the diaphyseal cortex, particularly in the hands. He had undergone successful renal transplantation at age 34. Audiometry revealed pantonal left-sided moderate-to-severe sensorineural hearing loss, and ophthalmologic examination confirmed no residual visual acuity with completely extinguished ERGs bilaterally. Neuropsychologic evaluation showed no functional deficits, and brain imaging was normal.



CDK5RAP2
**Microcephaly 3, primary, autosomal recessive, 604804 (3), AR**
Pagnamenta et al. (2012) reported a 6-year-old girl, born of consanguineous Somali parents, with primary microcephaly. She had delayed psychomotor development, microcephaly (-8.9 SD), and mild muscular hypotonia. The patient was diagnosed at age 3 years 10 months with moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss, which may have been due to another genetic defect given the consanguinity in the family.
Lancaster et al. (2013) reported a patient with poor growth apparent during fetal life and postnatally who had severe microcephaly (-13.2 SD). The patient had short stature (-6.7 SD), prominent eyes, conical-shaped and widely spaced teeth, and mixed conductive sensorineural hearing loss. Developmental milestones were mildly/moderately delayed. Neuroimaging showed a simplified gyral pattern, small frontal lobes, and partial absence of the corpus callosum.
Tan et al. (2014) reported a 6-year-old girl of northern European/Caucasian and Cherokee ancestry with severe progressive microcephaly (-8.9 SD) and developmental delay. She did not have dysmorphic features, and brain MRI showed no structural abnormalities. The girl was 1 of triplets; the other 2 sisters were unaffected.
Pagnamenta et al. (2016) reported an 11-year-old boy, born of unrelated Caucasian parents, with MCPH3. In addition to progressive microcephaly (-5.5 SD), moderate learning difficulties, and significant speech delay, he had behavioral problems, including aggression, temper tantrums, overactivity, poor concentration, and poor socialization. He had a sloping forehead and prominent nose, as well as 11 cafe-au-lait spots. Brain imaging showed no migrational or callosal abnormalities.



LRSAM1
**Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, axonal, type 2P, 614436 (3), AR, AD**
Guernsey et al. (2010) identified an extended multiply consanguineous family derived from a rural eastern Canadian isolate with 7 members affected with axonal CMT. Three further individuals were suspected to be affected. The index patient noted gradual onset of weakness around age 20, particularly affecting his distal lower extremities but also present in the hands. He noted episodic muscle cramping of extremity and trunk muscles. At the time of the examination he demonstrated bilateral pes cavus with marked wasting of distal lower extremity muscles and mild wasting of hand intrinsic muscles. Fasciculations were present in upper and lower extremity muscles. There was no gait ataxia. Upper and lower tendon reflexes were absent. He had mild loss of sensation on fingertips and severe loss of sensation in feet and legs, most markedly to vibration but also involving proprioception and pain perception. Other affected family members exhibited sensory and motor dysfunction with pes cavus. Autonomic symptoms were not consistently reported. Weakness and wasting were moderate and predominantly in distal lower extremity muscles. Onset was usually in the early adult years.
Weterman et al. (2012) reported a large 3-generation family with autosomal dominant inheritance of an axonal peripheral neuropathy consistent with CMT. Affected individuals presented in the second or third decade of life with progressive distal muscle weakness and mild sensory disturbances in the feet. Electrophysiologic studies in affected individuals revealed a severe axonal neuropathy. Sural nerve biopsy in one affected individual demonstrated severe axonal degeneration.
Nicolaou et al. (2013) reported a large 4-generation family from Sardinia with autosomal dominant axonal CMT. The proband developed distal weakness in the left lower limb and foot drop at about 34 years of age. At age 43, he showed moderate foot drop, could not stand on his heels, and had difficulty standing on his toes. There was atrophy in the lower legs and feet, as well as distal sensory loss. The upper limbs were not affected. He reported occasional cramps in the calf muscles and erectile dysfunction. Nerve conduction studies were consistent with an axonal form of CMT. Other affected family members had a similar phenotype, with onset between ages 15 and 50 years of slowly progressive distal weakness, atrophy, and multimodal hypesthesia in the lower limbs, diffusing to the upper limbs in later years. All except 1 patient remained ambulatory.
Berciano et al. (1986) described a large family of Spanish descent in which 10 members over 3 generations had a neuronal form of hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy. Peak age at onset was in the second decade. Some members showed slight slowing of conduction velocities, and 3 had normal conduction studies. Nerve biopsy showed regenerating fibers and atrophic axons, with some loss of myelinated fibers. There were several instances of male-to-male transmission. Nelis et al. (2004) presented follow-up studies on the family reported by Berciano et al. (1986). They noted that a total of 14 members of the family were affected. The age at onset ranged from 9 to 76 years (mean, 29 years), although most patients developed symptoms in the second decade. The disease presented with foot deformity and difficulty walking, with very slow progression. Ankle reflexes were absent or hypoactive in all patients, whereas knee reflexes were sometimes preserved. Mild stocking hypesthesia was present. There were normal or mildly decreased motor nerve conduction velocities (NCV) consistent with axonal CMT. Peeters et al. (2016) reported follow-up of the family reported by Berciano et al. (1986). Thirteen affected individuals spanning 3 generations had a mild, very slowly progressive or nonprogressive sensorimotor neuropathy affecting the lower limbs and resulting in difficulty walking. Affected individuals in the last generation, ranging in age from 35 to 47, were asymptomatic, but showed variable features including pes cavus, toe clawing, stocking hypoesthesia, ankle areflexia, and amyotrophy. Electrophysiologic studies showed normal or slightly decreased nerve conduction velocities and variably decreased SNAP and CMAP amplitudes. EMG studies were consistent with chronic denervation. MRI of lower limb muscles showed atrophy and fatty replacement. The findings were consistent with a length-dependent sensorimotor axonopathy affecting lumbosacral motor and sensory neurons. Several individuals previously thought to be affected in previous reports were reexamined and reclassified as being unaffected. Peeters et al. (2016) emphasized that many of the patients had very mild or even clinically asymptomatic disease, making the diagnosis difficult in the absence of electrophysiologic studies.



DOCK8
**Hyper-IgE recurrent infection syndrome, autosomal recessive, 243700 (3), AR**
Autosomal dominant hyper-IgE recurrent infection syndrome-1 (HIES1; 147060) is a primary immunodeficiency disorder characterized by recurrent Staphylococcus aureus skin abscesses, increased serum IgE, and abnormalities of the connective tissue, skeleton, and dentition (Buckley et al., 1972; Grimbacher et al., 1999).
Autosomal recessive HIES2 shares hyper-IgE, eosinophilia, and recurrent Staphylococcal infections, but is distinguished from autosomal dominant HIES1 by the lack of connective tissue and skeletal involvement (Renner et al., 2004).
See also TYK2 deficiency (611521), a clinically distinct disease entity that includes characteristic features of both autosomal recessive HIES2 and mendelian susceptibility to mycobacterial disease (MSMD; 209950) (Minegishi et al., 2006).
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of hyper-IgE recurrent infection syndrome, see 147060.
Renner et al. (2004) reported 13 patients from 6 consanguineous families with hyper-IgE syndrome and recurrent infections. Five of the families were of Turkish origin. Patients were between 6 months and 5 years of age. Eight patients died between 6 months and 12 years of age. Similar to the classic autosomal dominant form, patients had eczema, recurrent Staphylococcal infections of the skin and respiratory tract, increased serum IgE, and eosinophilia. In addition, patients had severe recurrent fungal and viral infections with molluscum contagiosum, herpes zoster, and herpes simplex. Two patients had recurrent autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Central nervous system sequelae, such as hemiplegia, ischemic infarction, and subarachnoid hemorrhages, were common. Lymphocyte assays showed poor mitogen response and failure to proliferate in response to antigens, indicating impairment of cellular immunity. Notably, patients with autosomal recessive HIES did not have the coarse facial features, or skeletal or dental abnormalities usually seen in autosomal dominant HIES1. The patients reported by Renner et al. (2004) also did not develop lung abscesses or pneumatoceles. Renner et al. (2004) concluded that autosomal recessive HIES2 is a distinct disorder from autosomal dominant HIES1.
Zhang et al. (2009) reported 11 patients from 8 families with recurrent sinopulmonary infections and cutaneous viral infections associated with combined immunodeficiency and increased serum IgE levels. Three of the families were consanguineous; some of the patients had been reported by Renner et al. (2004) and Milner et al. (2008). Clinical features included atopic dermatitis, recurrent upper and lower respiratory tract infections, recurrent otitis media, and recurrent sinusitis. Pulmonary pathogens included Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, respiratory adenovirus, and respiratory syncytial virus. All patients had extensive, frequently coexisting, cutaneous viral infections with herpes simplex virus, molluscum contagiosum, or herpes zoster, among other. Other infections included Staphylococcus aureus skin infections or osteomyelitis, mucosal or nail candidiasis, cryptococcal and H. influenzae meningitis, and salmonella enteritis, giardiasis, and pericarditis. Nine patients had severe and extensive food or environmental allergies, including anaphylaxis, and 6 had asthma or reactive airway disease. Two had eosinophilic esophagitis or lung disease. Patients with long-standing herpes simplex virus, human papillomavirus, and molluscum contagiosum infections developed vulvar, facial, and anal squamous cell dysplasia and carcinomas. Except for 1 of the patients reported by Renner et al. (2004), none had neurologic, vasculitic, or autoimmune findings. Laboratory findings were significant for decreased numbers of T cells in 10 of 11 patients, decreased natural killer cells in 6 of 10, decreased B cells in 5 of 11, and mild to moderate eosinophilia in 10. Six patients had hypergammaglobulinemia, all had low IgM, and 10 had very high IgE. CD8 T cells showed impaired proliferation and activation, with normal cytotoxic activity.



CHRDL1
**Megalocornea 1, X-linked, 309300 (3), XLR**
Megalocornea is an inherited eye disorder in which the corneal diameter is bilaterally enlarged (greater than 13 mm) without an increase in intraocular pressure. It may also be referred to as 'anterior megalophthalmos,' since the entire anterior segment is larger than normal. Features of megalocornea in addition to a deep anterior chamber include astigmatic refractive errors, atrophy of the iris stroma, miosis secondary to decreased function of the dilator muscle, iridodonesis, and tremulousness, subluxation, or dislocation of the lens. Whereas most affected individuals exhibit normal ocular function, complications include cataract development and glaucoma following lenticular dislocation or subluxation. X-linked recessive inheritance is the most common pattern, accounting for the male preponderance of the disorder (summary by Skuta et al., 1983).
Megalocornea sometimes occurs as part of the Marfan syndrome (154700).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Megalocornea
Autosomal recessive megalocornea has been reported (249300).
In a family reported by Riddell (1941), affected males showed large cornea as an isolated defect. Heterozygous women may show slight increase in corneal diameter. Two presumed homozygous females occurred in this family.
Skuta et al. (1983) studied 2 brothers with megalocornea and their 2 affected maternal uncles. The deceased maternal great-grandfather was reported to have had large eyes and cataracts. Examination of the 4 affected individuals revealed corneal diameters ranging from 13 to 15.5 mm, deep anterior chambers, and normal intraocular pressure. Additional features included atrophy of the iris stroma, iridodonesis, astigmatic refractive errors in the vertical meridian, lens subluxation, and cataract formation. Two of the patients exhibited transillumination of the irides, a feature not previously reported in this disorder, and the oldest patient, aged 54 years, displayed posterior 'crocodile shagreen' bilaterally, believed to represent opacities of the central stroma. Endothelial specular microscopy of affected individuals disclosed normal endothelial cell densities and morphologic characteristics and increased total endothelial cell populations, suggesting that the process involved in the development of megalocornea is one of primary overgrowth rather than secondary distention. Eye examination of 3 daughters of 1 of the affected men showed normal results except for amblyopia in 1 of them, and there was no history of women in the family with unusually large eyes or other ocular problems.
Mackey et al. (1991) studied 16 affected males from 5 unrelated families, including a large 5-generation family ('family 1') with linkage to Xq21.3-q22 (Chen et al., 1989), and found that affected males had corneal diameters between 13.0 and 16.5 mm. Arcus juvenilis, mosaic corneal dystrophy, and cataracts were found only in adult affected males. No abnormality was identified in carrier females.
Webb et al. (2012) ascertained 6 families segregating X-linked megalocornea. Affected individuals had corneal diameters ranging from 14 mm to 16 mm, large anterior chamber depths, decreased central corneal thickness, mosaic corneal degeneration ('shagreen'), corneal arcus juvenilis, and, in older patients, cataract. Iris transillumination with pigment dispersion was seen in all patients examined. No patient had glaucoma or significant vision loss, and no neurologic or systemic abnormalities were detected. Carrier females had no clinical signs of megalocornea.
Pfirrmann et al. (2015) studied a 4-generation family exhibiting megalocornea with broad intrafamilial phenotypic variability. There were 4 affected males related to each other by carrier females, with no male-to-male transmission, consistent with X-linked recessive inheritance. The proband was a 14-year-old boy who was noted at birth to have remarkably large eyes; there were no other systemic anomalies, and the eye phenotype showed no progression over time. At age 14, he had bilateral corneal diameters of 16 mm with dome-shaped corneas and very deep anterior chambers, but intraocular pressures were normal and no other ocular anomalies were detected. Corneas of an affected maternal uncle and maternal first cousin once removed had a keratoconus-like appearance. The uncle, whose corneal diameter was 14.5 mm, also exhibited congenital cataract and iris hypoplasia with transillumination and intraocular straylight, causing moderate photophobia, as well as iridodonesis, mild displacement of the pupils, slight arcus lipoides, and Krukenberg spindle pigment dispersion at the inner corneal surface (see GPDS1, 600510). The affected male cousin underwent removal of a congenital cataract in his twenties; he also had unilateral spontaneous retinal detachment due to vitreous degeneration. All 3 affected males had reduced corneal thicknesses, ranging from 350 to 405 micrometers. The proband's deceased maternal great-grandfather, who was the first affected family member, had also undergone bilateral cataract surgery at age 56 years. Examination of obligate carrier females and unaffected brothers showed flat corneas with normal diameters. Pfirrmann et al. (2015) noted that severity of biometric abnormalities does not correlate with congenital cataract or pigment dispersion, and that retinal detachment due to vitreous degeneration must be considered.



OPN1MW
**Blue cone monochromacy, 303700 (3), XLR**
Blue cone (OPN1SW; 613522) monochromatism is a rare X-linked congenital stationary cone dysfunction syndrome characterized by the absence of functional long wavelength-sensitive and medium wavelength-sensitive cones in the retina. Color discrimination is severely impaired from birth, and vision is derived from the remaining preserved blue (S) cones and rod photoreceptors. BCM typically presents with reduced visual acuity, pendular nystagmus, and photophobia. Patients often have myopia (review by Gardner et al., 2009). There is evidence for progression of disease in some BCM families (Nathans et al., 1989; Ayyagari et al., 2000; Michaelides et al., 2005).
The first detailed description of blue cone monochromacy is that given by Huddart (1777). The subject of that report 'could never do more than guess the name of any color; yet he could distinguish white from black, or black from any light or bright color...He had 2 brothers in the same circumstances as to sight; and 2 brothers and sisters who, as well as his parents, had nothing of this defect.' This disorder was previously interpreted as total colorblindness. Information presented by Spivey (1965) indicated that affected persons can see small blue objects on a large yellow field and vice versa.
See comments of Alpern et al. (1960). Blackwell and Blackwell (1961) described affected families in which a few blue cones seemed to be present.
Reitner et al. (1991) performed wavelength discrimination experiments in 5 male patients with blue cone monochromacy and found that within the limited intensity range at which rods and blue cones are simultaneously active, color vision is possible. The authors noted that these findings imply that some rod and cone signals travel by separate pathways to the visual processing stage where wavelength discrimination takes place.
Andreasson and Tornqvist (1991) reported 3 Swedish families with a diagnosis of X-linked achromatopsia, in which affected individuals showed blue cone monochromacy on color vision testing. In 1 family, all 7 patients displayed characteristic BCM, with myopia, low visual acuity, and typical color test results; only 2 of the 7 affected individuals had a measurable b-wave response to 30-Hz flickering light. In contrast, the other 2 families showed better visual acuity, myopia was not obligate, and with the use of a narrow bandpass filter, residual cone b-wave responses were measurable in all 4 patients. Andreasson and Tornqvist (1991) suggested that there might be different types of X-linked achromatopsia, including some with a more benign prognosis.
Michaelides et al. (2005) described 3 British families with X-linked recessive BCM, 2 of which showed evidence of progression of disease: the 60-year-old and 70-year-old maternal grandfathers from families 'A' and 'C,' respectively, tested as an achromat and a rod monochromat, respectively, and both showed mild macular retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) changes, whereas their respective affected grandsons displayed residual color discrimination and had normal-appearing fundi.
Cone Dystrophy 5
Gardner et al. (2010) examined 4 affected males and 2 carrier females from a 3-generation British family that was ascertained as having an X-linked progressive cone dystrophy, with blue cone monochromacy on color vision testing. Affected individuals were between 14 and 82 years of age and reported onset of reduced central vision in the first decade, with subsequent gradual deterioration of visual acuity and color vision. One patient had nystagmus; the others reported no history of nystagmus. The appearance of the macula ranged from mild retinal pigment epithelial changes in younger individuals to extensive macular atrophy in the older generation. Autofluorescence imaging was normal in the 3 youngest affected individuals, but the 82-year-old male patient showed bilateral perimacular rings of increased autofluorescence. Electroretinograms (ERGs) in all 4 affected individuals were consistent with severe generalized cone system dysfunction with preserved or relatively preserved rod function; all 4 had undetectable pattern ERGs, consistent with severe macular dysfunction. Color vision testing in the 3 youngest patients revealed good tritan discrimination with no measurable discrimination along protan or deutan axes. No discernible color discrimination was possible in the 82-year-old patient because of poor visual acuity; however, psychophysical experiments established that he had only minimal residual S-cone function at the macula. Noting the progressive nature of disease in this family, as well as the evidence of macular RPE disturbance even in younger patients, Gardner et al. (2010) stated that the phenotype was more consistent with progressive cone dystrophy than with BCM.
**Colorblindness, deutan, 303800 (3), X-linked**
Normal color vision in humans is trichromatic, being based on 3 classes of cone that are maximally sensitive to light at approximately 420 nm (blue cones; 613522), 530 nm (green cones; 300821), and 560 nm (red cones; 300822). Comparison by neural circuits of light absorption by the 3 classes of cone photoreceptors allows perception of red, yellow, green, and blue colors individually or in various combinations. Dichromatic color vision is severely defective color vision based on the use of only 2 types of photoreceptors, blue plus green (protanopia; see 303900) or blue plus red (deuteranopia). Anomalous trichromacy is trichromatic color vision based on a blue, green, and an anomalous red-like photoreceptor (protanomaly), or a blue, red, and an anomalous green-like photoreceptor (deuteranomaly). The color vision defect is generally mild but may in certain cases be severe. Common variation in red-green color vision exists among both normal and color-deficient individuals (review by Deeb, 2005).
Studies using reflection densitometry and retinal microbeam experiments showed that 2 different pigments mediate red and green sensitivity. These are located in the cones, each cone containing only 1 type of pigment (Waaler, 1968).
Simunovic et al. (2001) examined red-green color-deficient subjects, a small sample of monochromats, and age-matched color-normal control subjects to determine whether color vision deficiency confers a selective advantage under scotopic conditions. They found no evidence that red-green color deficiency or monochromatism confers a selective advantage under scotopic conditions, including dark adaptation, scotopic visual field sensitivity, or performance on a scotopic perceptual task.



IKBKG
**Ectodermal dysplasia and immunodeficiency 1, 300291 (3)**
Ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency-1 (EDAID1) is an X-linked recessive disorder that characteristically affects only males. Affected individuals have onset of recurrent severe infections due to immunodeficiency in early infancy or in the first years of life. There is increased susceptibility to bacterial, pneumococcal, mycobacterial, and fungal infections. Laboratory studies usually show dysgammaglobulinemia with low IgG subsets and normal or increased IgA and IgM, consistent with impaired 'class-switching' of B cells, although immunologic abnormalities may be subtle compared to the clinical picture, and B- and T-cell numbers are usually normal. There is a poor antibody response to polysaccharide vaccinations, particularly pneumococcus; response to other vaccinations is variable. Patients also have features of ectodermal dysplasia, including conical incisors, hypo/anhidrosis, and thin skin or hair. Severely affected individuals may also show lymphedema, osteopetrosis, and, rarely, hematologic abnormalities. The phenotype is highly variable, likely due to different hypomorphic mutations, and may be fatal in childhood. Intravenous immunoglobulins and prophylactic antibiotics are used as treatment; some patients may benefit from bone marrow transplantation. Although only males tend to be affected with immunodeficiency, many patients inherit a mutation from a mother who has mild features of IP or conical teeth (summary by Doffinger et al., 2001, Orange et al., 2004, Roberts et al., 2010, Heller et al., 2020).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Ectodermal Dysplasia and Immune Deficiency
Also see EDAID2 (612132), caused by mutation in the NFKBIA gene (164008).
Zonana et al. (2000) studied males from 4 families with hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia and immunodeficiency segregating as an X-linked recessive trait. The patients presented in the first years of life with recurrent infections, including pneumonia, bacterial infections of the bone and soft tissue, and sepsis. Organisms included pneumococcus, Pseudomonas, pneumocystis, and atypical mycobacteria. Laboratory studies showed dysgammaglobulinemia with increased IgM and low levels of IgA and IgG, although this was somewhat variable. Other immunologic parameters were essentially normal, although there was no antibody response to pneumococcal infection or vaccination. Response to tetanus was normal in some patients. The patients also had features of ectodermal dysplasia, including conical teeth, abnormal teeth, inability to sweat or poor sweating, and sometimes sparse hair. Two brothers in family 4 had the most severe clinical course, with death occurring by 3 years of age. These boys also had osteopetrosis, thus expanding the phenotype. Despite treatment, usually with IVIg, all had significant morbidity and mortality from recurrent infections. The mothers had variable mild manifestations, ranging from normal dentition to mild hypodontia or conical teeth; 2 had some skin hyperpigmentation. One mother (family 2) had low IgA, but no immune dysfunction.
Doffinger et al. (2001) identified 7 boys from 5 unrelated families with EDAID1. Four patients died between 9 months and 17 years of age. In all patients, ectodermal dysplasia features were somewhat milder compared to other forms of anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia. Most children experienced failure to thrive, recurrent digestive tract infections, often with intractable diarrhea and recurrent ulcerations, recurrent respiratory tract infections, often with bronchiectasis, and recurrent skin infections, suggesting that they were generally susceptible to various gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. The only blood immunologic abnormality detected in all patients tested was a poor antibody response to polysaccharide antigens (anti-AB isohemagglutinins and antibodies against H. influenzae and S. pneumoniae). In most patients, low levels of IgG or IgG2 were detected. Intravenous immunoglobulins and prophylactic antibiotics had occasionally been sufficient to improve clinical status when started early.
Jain et al. (2001) reported 2 unrelated male patients with EDAID1 associated with increased IgM and decreased IgG. One patient presented with pneumococcal meningitis at 9 months of age, and both patients had frequent upper respiratory and sinus infections despite intravenous gamma-globulin replacement therapy. Neither patient had a history of opportunistic infections suggestive of T-cell dysfunction. One patient had conical-shaped molars and incisors, but skin biopsies for both patients confirmed the absence of eccrine sweat glands and a paucity of hair follicles, consistent with ectodermal dysplasia. Both had normal bone density and did not have Mycobacterium avium complex infection.
Orange et al. (2002) reported 3 unrelated boys with EDAID1. Patient 1 was a 2-year-old boy who presented with severe systemic infections, including Listeria sepsis, Streptococcus bovis meningitis, and recurrent CMV sepsis and colitis. Laboratory studies showed increased IgM, variably decreased IgG, and detectable diphtheria and tetanus titers. Patients 2 and 3 were teenagers with a history of recurrent infections since childhood, including sinusitis, pneumonia, oral herpetic lesions, and systemic invasive atypical Mycobacterium infections. They had normal, decreased, or increased IgG and IgA, but normal IgM, as well as decreased specific antibody levels. Both were treated with IVIg. Detailed immunologic studies showed that all patients had defective CD40 (109535) signaling with impaired B-cell proliferative responses and decreased activation of NFKB compared to controls. NK cell levels were normal, but there was deficient NK cell cytotoxicity that could be partially overcome in vitro and in vivo with IL2 (161560) treatment.
Johnston et al. (2016) reported a male infant who presented with systemic Staphylococcus aureus infection associated with multiple brain infarcts, microabscesses, and white matter abnormalities. He was noted to have features of ectodermal dysplasia, such as sparse hair and absent eyelashes and eyebrows. He also had edema of the scalp, hands, scrotum, and lower extremities. Laboratory studies showed dysgammaglobulinemia with mostly low Ig levels, whereas T, B, and NK cells were normal. The infection persisted despite treatment, and he died at 18 days of age. The patient's mother and several female relatives had features consistent with IP; X-inactivation studies on the mother showed nonrandom X-chromosome inactivation with expression of the wildtype allele. Patient peripheral blood cells showed impaired cytokine production in response to stimulation of Toll-like receptors compared to controls.
Heller et al. (2020) reported a boy (patient 1) with severe EDAID1. He presented in infancy with a septic Enterobacter and Pneumocystis infection associated with decreased IgG and IgM. He also had lymphedema of the lower leg. Detailed immunologic studies showed functional B- and T-cell deficiency with impaired class-switched memory B cells, impaired CD3-induced T-cell proliferation, and skewing toward naive cells, indicating a defect in adaptive immunity. There was also impaired NFKB signaling through the Toll-like receptor, IL1B, and TNFA pathways, indicating defects in innate immunity. The patient underwent hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, but developed complications, including persistent colitis. Heller et al. (2020) concluded that T-cell dysfunction in EDAID1 predicts a severe clinical course.
Anhidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia with Immunodeficiency, Osteopetrosis, and Lymphedema
The International Incontinentia Pigmenti Consortium (2000) reported a male infant (patient IP85) with a severe form of EDAID1. In addition to recurrent infections, the boy had osteopetrosis and lymphedema. He was born with multiple capillary hemangiomas, developed lymphedema of the lower limbs, and had failure to thrive. Despite a destructive red blood cell picture and recurrent infections due to poor immune function, he survived 2 and a half years, but eventually succumbed to a tuberculosis infection. He had had operations to remove his spleen and an intestinal stricture, and biopsies revealed abnormal capillary beds in the gut, extrahepatic erythropoiesis, and osteopetrosis. His skin developed a reticular pigmentation. Cognitive development was normal. Genetic analysis identified a hemizygous X420W mutation in the IKBKG gene (300248.0002) that was inherited from his mother, who had IP. Mansour et al. (2001) presented more details of this patient (IP85), who also had hematologic disturbances, such as hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia. Doffinger et al. (2001) also studied this patient and classified him as having 'anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency, osteopetrosis, and lymphedema' (OLEDAID), which is within the phenotypic spectrum of EDAID1.
Doffinger et al. (2001) reported another boy, of French descent, with a similar OLEDAID phenotype, including recurrent infections, anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, lymphedema, and osteopetrosis. Blood monocytes and polymorphonuclear cells were normal in number and morphology, and B- and T-cell counts and responses to vaccine protein antigens (tetanus and polio) were normal. However, serum titers of antibodies against pneumococcus were low, despite proven infection. Serum levels of immunoglobulin isotypes were normal for age, with the exception of low to normal IgG levels. This patient and the patient described by Mansour et al. (2001) both died in the first years of life from overwhelming infectious disease caused by a variety of microorganisms, including gram-positive cocci, gram-negative bacilli, mycobacteria, and fungi. The French boy carried a hemizygous X420W mutation in the IKBKG gene that was inherited from his mother, who had mild IP. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the X420W mutation resulted in a 50 to 60% reduction of NF-kappa-B activation. Patient cells showed impaired cellular responses to TNF-alpha (191160) and a lower level of IFN-gamma (147570) production upon costimulation with IL12 (see 161560), IL1-beta (147720), or IL18 (600953) compared to controls. There was also evidence of impaired cellular responses to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and dissociated cellular responses to CD154 (CD40LG; 300386), suggesting that some but not all CD40 (109535)-mediated signals are NEMO-dependent in both dendritic cells and B cells. The findings indicated that the X420W mutation impairs but does not abolish NFKB activation, consistent with a hypomorphic allele and postnatal survival of the boys. Dupuis-Girod et al. (2002) reported that the French patient described by Doffinger et al. (2001) underwent hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, but developed complications and died at 18 months of age.
Roberts et al. (2010) reported a 6-year-old boy with hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, immunodeficiency, osteopetrosis, and lymphedema. He presented in the neonatal period with recurrent skin pustules, followed by conjunctivitis and Enterobacter septicemia associated with seizures. He later developed additional infections, including septic arthritis, gastroenteritis, and otitis media. Laboratory studies showed increased IgM, normal IgA, and fluctuating low IgG. He developed recurrent infections with group B Streptococcus, salmonella, and Molluscum contagiosum. Ectodermal dysplasia findings included conical teeth, frontal bossing, and absence of sweat glands. At around 18 months, he developed lymphedema of the hands, feet, and genitalia, as well as mild osteopetrosis on imaging. Other features included skin abnormalities, cortical ischemia, asthma, and hypothyroidism. Treatment was mostly effective and he had subsequent normal development with the ability to attend school. Genetic analysis identified a hemizygous 2-bp deletion (300248.0027) in the IKBKG gene. His mother, who had IP, carried the mutation in heterozygous state.
Female Patient with Transient Immunodeficiency
Martinez-Pomar et al. (2005) reported a female infant who presented at birth with classic features of IP. In the first months of life, she developed recurrent infections associated with high IgM and low IgG. She was treated successfully with IVIg, and the immunodeficiency spontaneously resolved. Genetic analysis identified a heterozygous frameshift mutation in the IKBKG gene (300248.0017). In vitro studies showed impaired IKBA degradation and defective activation of the NFKB pathway compared to controls. The X-inactivation status of peripheral blood cells from the patient was evaluated at 24, 30, 38, and 48 months of age and was found to have progressed from random at 24 and 30 months to skewed at 38 and 48 months of age, at which point her immunodeficiency had disappeared. Martinez-Pomar et al. (2005) stated that this was the first time that selection against the mutated X chromosome in X-linked disease had been documented in vivo.
**Ectodermal, dysplasia, anhidrotic, lymphedema and immunodeficiency, 300301 (3)**
**Immunodeficiency 33, 300636 (3), XLR**
Immunodeficiency-33 (IMD33) is an X-linked recessive disorder that affects only males. It is characterized by early-onset severe infections, usually due to pneumococcus, H. influenzae, and atypical mycobacteria, although other organisms have also been detected. Immunologic investigations may show variable abnormalities or may be normal. Disturbances include dysgammaglobulinemia with hypogammaglobulinemia, decreased IgG2, aberrant levels of IgM and IgA, and decreased class-switched memory B cells. There is often poor, but variable, response to vaccination; in particular, most patients do not develop antibodies to certain polysaccharide vaccines, notably pneumococcus. Other immunologic abnormalities may include impaired NK cytotoxic function, impaired cytokine production upon stimulation with IL1B (147720) or TNFA (191160), low IL6 (147620), low IL12 (see 161561), and decreased IFNG (147570). Patients do not have overt abnormalities of T-cell proliferation, although signaling pathways, such as CD40LG (300386)/CD40 (109535), may be disturbed. There is heterogeneity in the immunologic phenotype, resulting in highly variable clinical courses, most likely due to the different effects of hypomorphic mutations. Treatment with antibiotics and IVIg is usually beneficial; hematopoietic stem cell transplantation may not be necessary, but can be effective. Features of hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia are generally not present, although some patients may have conical teeth or hypodontia (summary by Orange et al., 2004, Filipe-Santos et al., 2006, Salt et al., 2008, Heller et al., 2020).
Orange et al. (2004) reported a boy (patient 5) who developed sepsis with Haemophilus influenzae at 5 years of age after immunization, and later had a cutaneous mycobacterial infection. Medical history revealed possible earlier bacterial pneumonia. He responded to treatment for the mycobacterium without relapse. He did not have hypogammaglobulinemia, but did have decreased levels of some IgG subsets, and decreased NK cell cytotoxic activity compared to controls. The boy had no clinical evidence of ectodermal dysplasia. Orange et al. (2004) reported follow-up of this patient, who was described as a 15-year-old boy with a specific pattern of infectious susceptibility and immunodeficiency. He had pneumonia 4 times between the ages of 3 and 7 years and Haemophilus influenzae type b sepsis at age 5 years. He had a normal total IgG level, but IgG3 levels that were never greater than 10 mg/dL and no specific antibody against tetanus toxoid (despite receiving immunization) or H. influenzae polyribosyl phosphate; he was treated with immunoglobulin replacement. Laboratory studies showed variably impaired immunologic function, with reduced CD40-induced B-cell proliferation, variable Toll-like receptor-induced TNF production, and partially reduced NFKB nuclear translocation. He did not have ectodermal dysplasia and had normal dentition, hair pattern, and perspiration.
Niehues et al. (2004) reported a boy, born of healthy unrelated Polish parents living in Germany, with IMD33 without signs of ectodermal dysplasia. From the age of 15 months, he suffered from multiple episodes of disseminated Mycobacterium avium disease (affecting mostly lymph nodes and bones). At the age of 7 years, he was diagnosed with bronchiectasis caused by Haemophilus influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae. At the age of 11 years, the patient presented with extraintestinal disease caused by Salmonella enteritidis. At the age of 12, he developed severe autoimmune hemolytic anemia and died from herpes simplex virus 1 meningoencephalitis. Immunologic workup showed low IgA and IgG levels, with markedly high serum IgM levels and low levels of gamma-IFN. No serum antibodies against diphtheria toxoid and tetanus toxoid were detected, and titers of antibodies against H. influenzae were low despite complete routine vaccination. The patient also presented low serum titers of antibodies against S. pneumoniae and had no allohemagglutinin antibodies. Known molecular causes of hyper-IgM syndrome (308230) were excluded. The numbers of T, B, and NK lymphocytes and the proportions of the CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocyte subsets were within normal ranges at the ages of 2 and 4 years, although he lacked memory B cells. Proliferative responses of T lymphocytes to mitogens were normal.
Ku et al. (2005) reported 2 unrelated boys with IMD33. They presented in the first years of life with recurrent severe systemic bacterial infections, including pneumococcus, H. influenzae, and Pseudomonas, as well as Candida. Immunoglobulin levels were normal, although IgM was low in 1 patient. Neither patient developed antibodies to pneumococcus, despite recurrent infections; patient 1 was unable to mount an antibody response to pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccination. However, both did respond to H. influenzae vaccine, and patient 2 mounted a response to tetanus toxoid. Neither patient had features of ectodermal dysplasia, although they had hypodontia and conical incisors. The mother of 1 patient had conical teeth, whereas the mother of the other patient had no clinical abnormalities. Heller et al. (2020) reported follow-up of one of the patients reported by Ku et al. (2005), noting that he was treated successfully with IVIg and lived an independent life at age 25.
Ku et al. (2007) described a 4.5-year-old boy, born to unrelated Belgian parents, with IMD33. He was noted to have hypodontia with conical incisors, but had only dry skin with normal sweating. He received all routine vaccinations with no adverse effect. At age 15 months, he was hospitalized for persistent fever with buccal cellulitis, caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae serotype 33. He recovered completely after intravenous cefuroxime for 7 days, but continued to have recurrent invasive infections with Streptococcus pneumoniae serotype 33. Beginning at age 23 months, he had serial vaccinations for pneumococcus, but again presented with recurrent invasive infections of Streptococcus pneumoniae serotype 23. Immunologic workup showed normal numbers of white cells and lymphocytes, normal Ig levels, and normal numbers of T, B, and NK cells. He had impaired antibody response to multiple vaccinations. Monthly prophylactic treatment with intravenous immunoglobulins was started when the patient was 3 years, 8 months old. Studies of patient fibroblasts showed impaired responses to stimulation by both IL1B and TNFA. This and other responses suggested a defect downstream of the TOLL/IL1R signaling pathway (see 603030).
Filipe-Santos et al. (2006) reported a multiplex American kindred (kindred A) in which 4 boys developed disseminated mycobacterial disease in an X-linked recessive pattern of inheritance. None of the patients had BCG vaccination, but all presented with disseminated M. avium infection between ages 5 and 14 years. Several developed other recurrent severe bacteremic infections with H. influenzae and Enterobacter. An unrelated boy of Italian/Serbian descent (kindred B) had BCG vaccination at age 2 months and presented with disseminated disease at age 2 years. At age 8 years, he was clinically well with no treatment. Another unrelated boy of German descent had recurrent infections in childhood, including bronchitis, pneumonitis, and H. influenzae, and presented at age 11 years with mycobacterial disease. In all patients, laboratory studies showed normal numbers of immune cells, normal T-cell proliferative responses, and normal immunoglobulins with proper antibody responses to vaccination, including pneumococcus, although this response was low and somewhat delayed. Detailed immunologic studies of all patients showed impaired CD40 signaling in monocytes and antigen-presenting cells, delayed nuclear accumulation of NFKB, and impaired secretion of IL12 by CD40L-expressing T cells. This resulted in impaired gamma-IFN production by T cells, ultimately resulting in increased susceptibility to mycobacterial infection. However, CD40-dependent proliferation and immunoglobulin class-switching of B cells was normal, and patients' blood and fibroblasts responded to other NFKB activators, such as TNFA, IL1B, and LPS. Some of the patients had sparse or conical teeth, which was long unrecognized, but no other features of ectodermal dysplasia.
Salt et al. (2008) reported a boy with recurrent infections, including Pneumocystis, CMV, and rotavirus. He had normal immunoglobulins and normal antibody response to diphtheria, tetanus, and H. influenzae B, but poor response to pneumococcal vaccination. Detailed immunologic studies showed impaired NK cell function and evidence of impaired T-cell receptor signaling through the NFKB pathway. Toll-like receptor function appeared to be normal. He had no evidence of ectodermal dysplasia.
Frans et al. (2017) reported a 2-year-old boy with IMD33. He presented at 1 year of age with otitis media and mastoiditis due to Pseudomonas infection, and later developed an EBV infection. Laboratory studies showed hypogammaglobulinemia, polysaccharide antibody deficiency, and low levels of switched memory B cells. Patient peripheral blood cells showed mildly impaired IL6 production in response to IL1B. He had no signs of ectodermal dysplasia. Treatment with immunoglobulin therapy resulted in clinical improvement.
Boisson et al. (2019) reported 2 brothers from a European family (family A) and a boy from a Japanese family (family B) with severe IMD33. The patients presented in infancy with severe systemic infections, including Klebsiella, respiratory syncytial virus, Enterobacter, E. coli, fungal infections, and HHV6. Although immunologic parameters were basically normal, 1 patient had no IgA and developed hypogammaglobulinemia with poor response to tetanus and H. influenzae vaccination. Two patients had other variable abnormalities, including low IgG levels, high white cells, transient neutropenia, lymphopenia, and low NK cell levels. TNFA production in response to LPS and IFNG was impaired in the 1 patient studied. None of the patients had features of ectodermal dysplasia; all died by 9 months of age. The mother in family A had mild features of IP.
Heller et al. (2020) reported a boy (patient 2) with IMD33 without ectodermal dysplasia. He had recurrent infections, including respiratory infections and oral HSV1. Immunoglobulin levels and tetanus antibodies were normal, but he had impaired response to polysaccharide vaccinations. He was successfully treated with IVIg.
Clinical Variability
Hsu et al. (2018) reported 4 adult males, including 2 sibs, who presented with disseminated mycobacterial infections between 26 and 38 years of age. All had a remote history of recurrent childhood infections, including H. influenzae. One patient had documented low IgM, increased IgA, and poor responses to pneumococcal, influenza, and measles vaccination. None had clear evidence of ectodermal dysplasia. Three of the patients died from the mycobacterial infection; the fourth patient was unable to clear the infection.
**Immunodeficiency, isolated, 300584 (3)**
**Incontinentia pigmenti, 308300 (3), XLD**
Familial incontinentia pigmenti (IP) is a genodermatosis that segregates as an X-linked dominant disorder and is usually lethal prenatally in males (The International Incontinentia Pigmenti Consortium, 2000). In affected females it causes highly variable abnormalities of the skin, hair, nails, teeth, eyes, and central nervous system. The prominent skin signs occur in 4 classic cutaneous stages: perinatal inflammatory vesicles, verrucous patches, a distinctive pattern of hyperpigmentation, and dermal scarring. Cells expressing the mutated X chromosome are eliminated selectively around the time of birth, so females with IP exhibit extremely skewed X-inactivation.
Also see hypomelanosis of Ito (300337), which was formerly designated incontinentia pigmenti type I (IP1).
Incontinentia pigmenti is a disturbance of skin pigmentation sometimes associated with a variety of malformations of the eye, teeth, skeleton, heart, etc. The pigmentary disturbance, an autochthonous tattooing, is evident at or soon after birth and may be preceded by a phase suggesting inflammation in the skin. In the fully developed disease, the skin shows swirling patterns of melanin pigmentation, especially on the trunk, suggesting the appearance of 'marble cake.' Histologically, deposits of melanin pigment are seen in the corium: the designation was based on the idea that the basal layer of the epidermis is 'incontinent' of melanin. Garrod (1906) may have described the first case, a girl with typical pigmentary changes together with mental deficiency and tetraplegia. The cutaneous phenotype has other interesting features, namely, that in the first months of life it has some characteristics of an inflammatory process and that the pigmentary changes usually disappear completely by the age of 20 years. Caffey disease (infantile hyperostosis; 114000) displays a similar behavior, with pronounced signs suggesting an inflammatory process in many bones with subsequent quiescence and in many cases disappearance of all evidence of previous disease.
Kuster and Olbing (1964) reported a mentally retarded woman with incomplete dentition and a history of skin lesions at birth. She had 1 son and 11 daughters. Six of the girls showed incomplete dentition and incontinentia pigmenti. Spallone (1987) examined 7 affected members in a family with a total of 14 affected members in 3 generations. There were many abortions in the family, several of which were identified as male. Spallone (1987) showed that vascular abnormalities of the retina and disorders of the retinal pigment epithelium are the most important ocular lesions.
Landy and Donnai (1993) reviewed the disorder in full. They pointed out that the dermatologic features classically occur in 4 stages, although all stages may not occur and several stages may overlap. Stage 1 is characterized by erythema, vesicles, and pustules; stage 2 by papules, verrucous lesions, and hyperkeratosis; stage 3 by hyperpigmentation; and stage 4 by pallor, atrophy, and scarring. Dystrophy of the nails is frequent but usually mild. Unilateral breast aplasia is a well-recognized but uncommon feature.
Parrish et al. (1996) reviewed the clinical findings in IP. They also determined the parent of origin of new mutations for this disorder and presented evidence for tissue-specific differences in the activity of normal and mutant IP alleles. Parrish et al. (1996) noted that in affected females the most prominent findings occur in the skin, the eye, and the central nervous system. In affected females the disorder may be diagnosed shortly after birth by the presence of a progressive erythematous and vesicular rash, which becomes sequentially verrucous, pigmented, then atrophic and may leave adolescents and adults with areas of linear and reticular hypopigmentation. Cicatricial alopecia, hypodontia, or anodontia may occur and cicatrization of the retina may be present. Parrish et al. (1996) reported that 98% of affected females showed completely skewed patterns of X inactivation in peripheral blood leukocytes. Fibroblast subclones from a biopsy at the boundary of a skin lesion in a newborn IP patient revealed that cells with the disease-bearing X chromosome were still present. Parrish et al. (1996) determined the parent of origin in 15 families and reported that paternal new mutations were twice as common as maternal ones.
Roberts et al. (1998) described a woman with IP who had 2 successive term pregnancies: the first, a male infant, was alive and well at 2 years; the second liveborn male had early postnatal distress and died after 1 day. The 33-year-old mother had been diagnosed with IP at age 18 months. In infancy she developed generalized erythema and blisters, which were initially thought to represent an allergic reaction to variola vaccination. She later developed hyperpigmentation in the affected areas, and whenever she developed a fever, she exhibited a papular rash along the pigmented skin, similar to that described by Pfau and Landthaler (1995). The proposita showed residual marbled pigmentation, conical teeth, and thin hair. Her mother also had alopecia, peg teeth, hypodontia, and eye abnormalities, and had lost 2 male infants around the time of birth. Analysis of polymorphic microsatellite markers, closely linked to the IP gene on Xq28, indicated that each son of the proposita inherited a different X chromosome from his mother. Judging from the findings in the son who died, Roberts et al. (1998) proposed that the neonatal phenotype of IP may be characterized by lethal disturbances in the hematopoietic and immunologic systems.
Late recurrences of the first-stage inflammatory lesions after the initial rash are uncommon and the mechanism involved in this phenomenon is unclear. Bodak et al. (2003) reported 5 cases of children who experienced episodes of late reactivation of IP. In all cases, the recurrences occurred on the previously hyperpigmented streaks several months or years after resolution of the initial eruptions. In most cases, the recurrences were preceded by an infectious episode. Bodak et al. (2003) proposed that reactivation of IP skin lesions is due to the persistence of mutant NEMO keratinocytes in sites of previous lesions. They hypothesized that cytokines, such as TNFA (191160), induce remaining populations of mutant keratinocytes to undergo apoptosis, resulting in the bullous and verrucous lesions characteristic of first-stage inflammatory IP lesions.
O'Doherty et al. (2011) studied 11 patients with IP and found that 5 (47%) had visually significant ocular findings. Minimal retinal findings included straightening of retinal vessels and retinal pigment epithelial changes. Moderate retinal changes included abnormal vascular pattern such as shunt vessels, neovascularization, and ischemia, and severe retinal changes signified retinal detachment. Six of 22 eyes were lost to retinal detachment. The retinal detachments often occurred early in life. O'Doherty et al. (2011) recommended fluorescein angiography (FA) to diagnose ischemic retina in all patients with retinal changes, and early treatment with peripheral retinal photocoagulation to reduce the risk of retinal detachment.
Basilius et al. (2015) performed spectral domain-optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) and FA in 5 female patients with IP who were under the age of 5 years. Two children had reduced visual behavior in association with abnormalities of the inner foveal layers on SD-OCT. FA showed filling defects in retinal and choroidal circulations and irregularities of the foveal avascular zones. The foveal to parafoveal ratios were greater than 0.57 in 6 eyes of 3 patients who had extraretinal neovascularization and/or peripheral avascular retina on FA and were treated with laser; of these, 3 eyes from 2 patients had irregularities in foveal avascular zones and poor vision. Basilius et al. (2015) concluded that vigilant surveillance in the early years of life may preserve vision in some patients with IP.
Mariath et al. (2018) reported 4 families, with a total of 15 cases of incontinentia pigmenti, all with the recurrent IKBKG deletion (300248.0001), with substantial intrafamilial clinical variability. Within each family, there were both mild and severe cases as well as varying types of involvement (skin, teeth, hair, eye, nail, and neurologic). The authors specifically analyzed the degree of dental involvement, ranging from tooth agenesis to abnormalities of dental crowns and high-arched palate, and noted that these findings also varied substantially within families. Given that all family members had the same IKBKG deletion, Mariath et al. (2018) proposed that other as yet unidentified modifying genes might influence disease expressivity.
Female Patient With Transient Immunodeficiency
Martinez-Pomar et al. (2005) reported a female infant who presented at birth with classic features of IP. In the first months of life, she developed recurrent infections associated with high IgM and low IgG. She was treated successfully with IV Ig, and the immunodeficiency spontaneously resolved. Genetic analysis identified a heterozygous frameshift mutation in the IKBKG gene (300248.0017). In vitro studies showed impaired IKBA degradation and defective activation of the NFKB pathway compared to controls, The X-inactivation status of peripheral blood cells from the patient was evaluated at 24, 30, 38, and 48 months of age and was found to have progressed from random at 24 and 30 months to skewed at 38 and 48 months of age, at which point her immunodeficiency had disappeared. Martinez-Pomar et al. (2005) stated that this was the first time that selection against the mutated X chromosome in X-linked disease had been documented in vivo.
**Invasive pneumococcal disease, recurrent isolated, 2, 300640 (3)**



CLCN5
**Dent disease, 300009 (3), XLR**
The term 'X-linked hypercalciuric nephrolithiasis' comprises several related forms of hereditary renal tubular disorders caused by mutations in the CLCN5 gene, including Dent disease, X-linked recessive nephrolithiasis (310468), X-linked recessive hypophosphatemic rickets (300554), and low molecular weight proteinuria (308990). Although these disorders are allelic and are all characterized by progressive proximal renal tubulopathy with hypercalciuria, low molecular weight proteinuria, and nephrocalcinosis, they vary in degree of severity and were originally reported as separate disorders. Some have considered these disorders as phenotypic variants of a single disease, referred to as the 'Dent disease complex' (Scheinman, 1998; Gambaro et al., 2004).
Scheinman et al. (1999) provided a comprehensive review of genetic disorders of renal electrolyte transport.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Dent Disease
See also Dent disease-2 (300555), caused by mutation in the OCRL gene (300535) on chromosome Xq26.
Dent and Friedman (1964) reported 2 unrelated English boys with rickets associated with renal tubular damage characterized by hypercalciuria, hyperphosphaturia, proteinuria, and aminoaciduria. In a follow-up of these patients, Wrong et al. (1994) reported that they had developed nephrolithiasis and renal failure.
Wrong et al. (1990, 1994) reported a total of 5 families with X-linked inheritance of a renal Fanconi syndrome with proximal renal tubular defects, including low molecular weight proteinuria, hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, metabolic bone disease, and progressive renal failure. They termed the disorder 'Dent disease.' In general, female carriers were asymptomatic, but all had low molecular weight proteinuria and approximately half had hypercalciuria. Approximately one-third of affected males had rickets.
Wrong et al. (1992) suggested that Dent disease could be distinguished from the disorder reported by Frymoyer et al. (1991) as X-linked recessive nephrolithiasis by the presence of microglobulinuria. Microglobulinuria in Dent disease involved particularly beta-2-microglobulin (B2M; 109700), alpha-1-microglobulin (AMBP; 176870), and retinol-binding protein (RBP; 180250). However, the total amount of these abnormal urinary proteins was not always sufficient to yield a positive dipstick test for protein. Wrong et al. (1992) also reported affected women: one died of nephrocalcinosis and renal failure, and another was asymptomatic but had microglobulinuria, suggesting that carrier females may manifest some symptoms. Wrong et al. (1992) noted other families with microglobulinuria and male predominance who may have had Dent disease (Buckalew et al., 1974; Carey and Hopfer, 1987; Long et al., 1990).
**Hypophosphatemic rickets, 300554 (3), XLR**
X-linked recessive hypophosphatemic rickets is a form of X-linked hypercalciuric nephrolithiasis, which comprises a group of disorders characterized by proximal renal tubular reabsorptive failure, hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and renal insufficiency. These disorders have also been referred to as the 'Dent disease complex' (Scheinman, 1998; Gambaro et al., 2004). For a general discussion of Dent disease, see 300009.
Bolino et al. (1993) reported an Italian family with X-linked recessive hypophosphatemic rickets. Five males presented with rickets or osteomalacia, hypophosphatemia, hypercalciuria, and proteinuria. The patients developed nephrocalcinosis with progressive renal failure in adulthood.
Oudet et al. (1997) reported a French family with X-linked recessive hypophosphatemic rickets.
**Nephrolithiasis, type I, 310468 (3), XLR**
X-linked recessive nephrolithiasis with renal failure is a form of X-linked hypercalciuric nephrolithiasis, which comprises a group of disorders characterized by proximal renal tubular reabsorptive failure, hypercalciuria, nephrolithiasis, and renal insufficiency. These disorders have also been referred to as the 'Dent disease complex' (Scheinman, 1998; Gambaro et al., 2004). For a general discussion of Dent disease, see 300009.
Frymoyer et al. (1991) reported a large kindred living in the St. Lawrence valley of northern New York, descendants of 19th century Irish immigrants, with nephrolithiasis inherited in an X-linked recessive pattern. Nine affected males had onset in childhood of calcium nephrolithiasis and proteinuria, with progression to nephrocalcinosis and renal insufficiency. Renal biopsies showed tubular atrophy, interstitial fibrosis, and glomerulosclerosis. Renal biopsies were abnormal even in younger members, but abnormalities in the renal excretion of calcium, phosphate, potassium, and uric acid were found only in affected adults. In 1 patient who had a renal transplant for 7 years, the disease had not recurred. Frymoyer et al. (1992) pointed out that patients with X-linked recessive nephrocalcinosis differed from Dent disease by having normal growth, no evidence of bone disease, and sometimes absence of hypercalciuria despite the presence of nephrocalcinosis, recurrent calcium nephrolithiasis, or both. Furthermore, all could acidify their urine to a pH below 5.6.
**Proteinuria, low molecular weight, with hypercalciuric nephrocalcinosis, 308990 (3), XLR**
Low molecular weight proteinuria with hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis is a form of X-linked hypercalciuric nephrocalcinosis, a group of disorders characterized by proximal renal tubular reabsorptive failure, hypercalciuria, nephrocalcinosis, and renal insufficiency. These disorders have also been referred to as the 'Dent disease complex' (Scheinman, 1998; Gambaro et al., 2004). For a general discussion of Dent disease, see 300009.
Suzuki et al. (1985) identified 5 boys with asymptomatic proteinuria in a screening program of Japanese children. More than 50% of their urinary proteins were those with a molecular weight of less than 40 kD, defined by Suzuki et al. (1985) as low molecular weight (LMW) proteins, including lysozyme (153450) and beta-2-microglobulin (109700). Serum proteins with a molecular weight of less than 50 kD are freely filtered by the renal glomeruli, but the filtered proteins in normal persons are then almost completely reabsorbed at the proximal tubules. Thus, the patients appeared to have an impaired proximal tubular reabsorption of LMW proteins. Follow-up for 4 to 16 years found that 3 patients developed further evidence of tubular dysfunction, including glycosuria, hypophosphatemia, aminoaciduria, and increasing serum creatinine, indicating that it was a progressive disorder. In urine specimens from the patients reported by Suzuki et al. (1985), Murakami et al. (1987) also detected alpha-1-acid glycoprotein (orosomucoid; 138600), alpha-1-microglobulin (176870), and retinol-binding protein (180250), all of which have low molecular weights.
Murakami and Kawakami (1990) reported a slight tendency toward shortening stature with increasing age in affected children. Renal biopsies showed focal changes, including focal glomerulosclerosis and focal tubular atrophy, in approximately one-third of patients.
In studying first-degree relatives of 8 male patients with asymptomatic LMW proteinuria in 6 families, Kawakami et al. (1991) found elevated urinary levels of beta-2-microglobulin in 2 of 6 fathers and 2 of 6 mothers and in 4 of 12 other first-degree relatives. The authors concluded that the increased frequency in fathers argued against X-linked inheritance.
Geary et al. (1985) described 3 patients in England, 2 boys and a girl, with possible asymptomatic LMW proteinuria, indicating that the disorder was not confined to Japan.
Furuse et al. (1992) described 6 male patients with what they referred to as familial progressive renal tubulopathy but recognized as identical to familial low molecular weight proteinuria. The 6 patients belonged to 2 families in a single kindred: the propositus, his father, a paternal first cousin, 2 paternal uncles, and a maternal uncle. X-linked inheritance was thought to be most likely, but the possibility of autosomal dominant inheritance remained because of the occurrence of abnormality on both sides of the family. Furuse et al. (1992) suggested that the disorder may be progressive since older subjects showed more severe tubular dysfunction. All 6 had aminoaciduria and hypercalciuria, whereas glycosuria was present in 2 and phosphaturia in 4.
Igarashi et al. (1995) found that patients with low molecular weight proteinuria tended to have hypercalciuric nephrocalcinosis without rickets or renal failure. Some children additionally demonstrated hematuria, glycosuria, amino aciduria, impaired urinary concentrating ability, and a mild decrease in creatinine clearance.





PCDH15
**Deafness, autosomal recessive 23, 609533 (3), AR**
Ahmed et al. (2003) reported 3 families with isolated deafness. Two of the families had no history of nyctalopia, and the funduscopy and electroretinograms were normal in 2 older affected individuals from each family (age range, 13-44 years). Vestibular responses were intact in affected individuals.
Doucette et al. (2009) reported a consanguineous family from Newfoundland, Canada, with isolated hearing loss that was neurosensory, prelingual, and severe to profound. Ancestors of the family had emigrated from England in the early 1800s to settle a fishing 'outport' on Newfoundland's southern coast. Detailed examination of 2 homozygous carriers in middle age showed no evidence of Usher syndrome and no vestibular abnormalities.
**Usher syndrome, type 1D/F digenic, 601067 (3), AR, Digenic recessive**
Usher syndrome type I is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by profound congenital hearing impairment with unintelligible speech, early retinitis pigmentosa (usually evident within the first decade), and constant vestibular dysfunction. Type I is distinguished from type II (276901) on the basis of severity of hearing loss and the extent of vestibular involvement. Type I patients are profoundly deaf, whereas type II patients are 'hard of hearing.' Vestibular function is defective in type I patients, whereas type II patients have normal vestibular function (Moller et al., 1989). Patients with type III (USH3; 276902) have progressive hearing loss.
For a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Usher syndrome type I, see 276900.
Wayne et al. (1996) reported that a first-cousin union in a family of Pakistani origin produced 4 children with clinical signs of Usher syndrome, including profound prelingual auditory impairment of sensorineural type, congenital vestibular dysfunction, and progressive pigmentary retinopathy.
**Usher syndrome, type 1F, 602083 (3), AR**
Usher syndrome constitutes a group of autosomal recessive disorders characterized by progressive pigmentary retinopathy and sensorineural hearing loss. Phenotypic distinctions are based on auditory and vestibular differences. Persons with forms of Usher syndrome type I (276900) have congenital severe to profound hearing loss and vestibular dysfunction.



DDX59
**Orofaciodigital syndrome V, 174300 (3), AR**
Rischbieth (1910) pictured a Hindu patient with postaxial polydactyly and median cleft of the upper lip. His brother was identically affected. Thurston (1909) had earlier reported these brothers. The brothers had median cleft of the vermilion of the upper lip and postaxial polydactyly of the hands and feet. Rischbieth cited the family of Roux (1847) in which the father had unilateral harelip and 6 digits on all 4 limbs, whereas the son had double harelip and the same deformity of hands and feet. Khoo and Saad (1980) described the case of a 26-year-old male nurse of Indian descent. The proband for Thurston (1909) was a 20-year-old recruit for the Bengal police. Yet another case in an Indian male was reported by Gopalakrishna and Thatte (1982).
Munke et al. (1990) noted oral frenula as a finding in Thurston syndrome.
Shamseldin et al. (2013) studied 2 consanguineous multiplex Arab families with orofaciodigital syndrome. All affected individuals exhibited the core features of cleft palate, lobulated tongue, and polydactyly; all also had frontal bossing and intellectual disability. In published photographs, the polydactyly was postaxial, and a subtle midline lip defect was illustrated. In 1 family, 2 affected individuals also had cardiac anomalies, including tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) and ventricular septal defect; additional anomalies in the patient with TOF included scoliosis, fused kidneys, and agenesis of the corpus callosum. One of the 4 affected individuals in the other family also exhibited Hirschsprung disease.



SORD
**?Cataract, congenital, 182500 (2)**
Sorbitol dehydrogenase (SORD; EC 1.1.1.14) catalyzes the interconversion of polyols and their corresponding ketoses. The first reaction of the pathway (also called the polyol pathway) is the reduction of glucose to sorbitol by ALDR1 (103880) with NADPH as the cofactor. SORD then oxidizes the sorbitol to fructose using NAD(+) cofactor (summary by Carr and Markham, 1995).



SERPINF2
**Alpha-2-plasmin inhibitor deficiency, 262850 (3), AR**
Alpha-2-plasmin inhibitor deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive hemorrhagic diathesis. Most bleeds are severe, appear during childhood, and, in a few cases, umbilical bleeding is the first manifestation. Some homozygous patients present only moderate bleeding (Favier et al., 2001).
An inherited hemorrhagic diathesis due to plasmin inhibitor deficiency was described by Koie et al. (1978) in a 25-year-old Okinawa man. He had suffered prolonged bleeding and ecchymoses after minor trauma, spontaneous joint hemorrhage, and one episode of hemothorax. The bleeding episodes were reduced in frequency and severity by an antiplasminic drug. Laboratory abnormalities were limited to shortened euglobulin-lysis time and whole blood clot lysis time. No circulating alpha-2-plasmin inhibitor was found in the plasma. Even though only one case was observed, autosomal recessive inheritance was undoubted because the parents were consanguineous and both had plasma antiplasmin levels about half normal. The authors called the condition Miyasato disease after the proband's surname. The same patient was reported by Aoki et al. (1979).
Kluft et al. (1979) reported an apparent homozygote, a 17-year-old boy with unrelated parents and a severe hemorrhagic diathesis. In a full report, Kluft et al. (1987) reported that a younger sister was likewise an apparent homozygote and that 8 heterozygotes were identified by half-normal activities and normal antigen concentrations. The 2 homozygotes were found to have very low functional levels as determined by the immediate plasmin inhibition test but normal plasma concentrations of alpha-2-antiplasmin antigen. The abnormal alpha-2-antiplasmin was designated Enschede after the city of birth of the propositus. The abnormal antiplasmin molecule was defective in the plasmin inhibition test, but had normal plasminogen-binding properties.
Favier et al. (2001) stated that a notable clinical feature is an unusual localization of bleeding, intramedullary hematoma in the diaphyses of long bones, which has been described in 4 cases (Takahashi et al., 1991; Devaussuzenet et al., 1998). Radiography indicated homogeneous hyperlucent lesions with regular limits and without marginal sclerosis, which can be difficult to distinguish from cystic fibrous dysplasia, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, or metastasis of neuroblastoma. Accurate diagnosis of these intramedullary hematomas can be achieved with magnetic resonance imaging, however. Similar bone hematomas have been described in afibrinogenemia cases (Lagier et al., 1980).



MAPT
**Dementia, frontotemporal, with or without parkinsonism, 600274 (3), AD**
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) refers to a clinical manifestation of the pathologic finding of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). FTD, the most common subtype of FTLD, is a behavioral variant characterized by changes in social and personal conduct with loss of volition, executive dysfunction, loss of abstract thought, and decreased speech output. A second clinical subtype of FTLD is 'semantic dementia,' characterized by specific loss of comprehension of language and impaired facial and object recognition. A third clinical subtype of FTLD is 'primary progressive aphasia' (PPA), characterized by a reduction in speech production, speech errors, and word retrieval difficulties resulting in mutism and an inability to communicate. All subtypes have relative preservation of memory, at least in the early stages. FTLD is often associated with parkinsonism or motor neuron disease (MND) resembling amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS; 105400) (reviews by Tolnay and Probst, 2002 and Mackenzie and Rademakers, 2007). Mackenzie et al. (2009, 2010) provided a classification of FTLD subtypes according to the neuropathologic findings (see PATHOGENESIS below).
Clinical Variability of Tauopathies
Tauopathies comprise a clinically variable group of neurodegenerative diseases characterized neuropathologically by accumulation of abnormal MAPT-positive inclusions in nerve and/or glial cells. In addition to frontotemporal dementia, semantic dementia, and PPA, different clinical syndromes with overlapping features have been described, leading to confusion in the terminology (Tolnay and Probst, 2002). Other terms used historically include parkinsonism and dementia with pallidopontonigral degeneration (PPND) (Wszolek et al., 1992); disinhibition-dementia-parkinsonism-amyotrophy complex (DDPAC) (Lynch et al., 1994); frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism (FLDEM) (Yamaoka et al., 1996); and multiple system tauopathy with presenile dementia (MSTD) (Spillantini et al., 1997). These disorders are characterized by variable degrees of frontal lobe dementia, parkinsonism, motor neuron disease, and amyotrophy.
Other neurodegenerative associated with mutations in the MAPT gene include Pick disease (172700) and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP; 601104),
Inherited neurodegenerative tauopathies linked to chromosome 17 and caused by mutation in the MAPT gene have also been collectively termed 'FTDP17' (Lee et al., 2001).
Kertesz (2003) suggested the term 'Pick complex' to represent the overlapping syndromes of FTD, primary progressive aphasia (PPA), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), PSP, and FTD with motor neuron disease. He noted that frontotemporal dementia may also be referred to as 'clinical Pick disease' and that the term 'Pick disease' should be restricted to the pathologic finding of Pick bodies.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration
Mutations in several different genes can cause frontotemporal dementia and frontotemporal lobar degeneration, with or without motor neuron disease. See FTLD with TDP43 inclusions (607485), caused by mutation in the GRN gene (138945) on chromosome 17q21; FTLALS7 (600795), caused by mutation in the CHMP2B gene (609512) on chromosome 3p11; inclusion body myopathy with Paget disease and FTD (IBMPFD; 167320), caused by mutation in the VCP gene (601023) on chromosome 9p13; ALS6 (608030), caused by mutation in the FUS gene (137070) on 16p11; ALS10 (612069), caused by mutation in the TARDBP gene (605078) on 1p36; and FTDALS1 (105550), caused by mutation in the C9ORF72 gene (614260) on 9p21.
In 1 family with FTD, a mutation was identified in the presenilin-1 gene (PSEN1; 104311) on chromosome 14, which is usually associated with a familial form of early-onset Alzheimer disease (AD3; 607822).
Schmitt et al. (1984) reported a family in which 10 individuals had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, parkinsonism-dementia or both. The proband was a 59-year-old man who died after a 14-year course of an illness characterized by progressive dementia, parkinsonism, and ALS. The affected persons were rather widely separated in the family, suggesting to the authors recessive inheritance 'with genetic epistasis.' The pathologic features consisted particularly of Alzheimer neurofibrillary tangles in many areas.
Wszolek et al. (1992) reported a large kindred in which 32 members in 8 generations had a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive parkinsonism with dystonia, dementia, ocular motility abnormalities, pyramidal tract dysfunction, frontal lobe release signs, perseverative vocalizations, and urinary incontinence. The course was exceptionally 'aggressive'; onset of symptoms and death consistently occurred in the fifth decade. In the 4 patients so studied, positron emission tomographic (PET) studies with labeled 6-fluoro-L-DOPA (6FD) demonstrated markedly reduced striatal uptake of the 6FD. Autopsy findings included severe neuronal loss with gliosis in substantia nigra, pontine tegmentum, and globus pallidus, with less involvement of the caudate and the putamen. There were no plaques, tangles, Lewy bodies, or amyloid bodies. The pedigree was entirely consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance. Wszolek et al. (1992) proposed the designation autosomal dominant parkinsonism and dementia with pallidopontonigral degeneration (PPND). Wijker et al. (1996) stated that the kindred described by Wszolek et al. (1992) contained 34 affected individuals over 9 generations. The onset of the disease varied from 32 to 58 years. Wijker et al. (1996) estimated that the disease penetrance was 15% by age 40, 80% by age 45, and more than 90% after 50.
Delisle et al. (1999) reported 2 brothers from a French family who presented early in the fourth decade with a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by an akinetic rigid syndrome and dementia. There was widespread neuronal and glial tau accumulation in the cortex, basal ganglia, brainstem nuclei, and white matter.
Yamaoka et al. (1996) described FLDEM as characterized by behavioral and neuropsychologic features reflecting frontal lobe dysfunction. The changes in behavior and personality that are observed within this clinical category may not present as a distinct phenotype and may even suggest other diagnoses such as schizophrenia, amyotrophy, depression, or dysphasia among various affected members of a family (Lynch et al., 1994).
Lynch et al. (1994) described 13 affected individuals, 6 of whom were living, in family Mo. The mean age of onset was 45 years. Personality and behavioral changes, including the Kluever-Bucy syndrome, were the first symptoms in 12 individuals. All affected individuals demonstrated rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability. Mean duration of the disease was 13 years. Genetic etiology was suspected because of the familial clustering in family Mo, despite their wide geographic distribution. Clinical features of individual family members suggested a variety of unrelated clinical diagnoses. Two members who had died before the study was initiated had been institutionalized and carried the diagnosis of schizophrenia. Five family members had depression or alcoholism as young adults. A clinical diagnosis of amyotrophy was made in another. In retrospect, when all the cases were viewed as a group, there was a common theme. Disinhibition occurred early in the disease course. This was manifested by alcoholism, hyperreligiosity, inappropriate sexual behavior, excessive eating, and shoplifting. Curiously, many exhibited a pattern of hoarding and craving of sweets. Eventually, all affected family members developed frontal lobe dementia, affecting behavior and judgment more than language and praxis, and parkinsonism.
Yamaoka et al. (1996) studied a family in which members of 3 generations (and by implication a fourth earlier generation) suffered from FLDEM. Clinical features were summarized for 13 patients; autopsy information was available for 3. The proband had onset of symptoms at age 52 years. Early difficulties included 'depression,' personality changes, and multiple physical complaints, including difficulty with walking. Family members described the patient as severely amotivational, apathetic, and sometimes explosively irritable. He showed impairments in naming, visuoperception, and executive functions, but the rapid forgetting and apraxia typical of AD were not observed. Brain magnetic resonance imaging was normal. Resting-state fluorodeoxyglucose positron-emission tomography showed reduced uptake in the anterior portion of the frontal and temporal lobes but no diffuse hypometabolism and no reduction of the parietotemporal cortices as is typical in AD. The average age of onset of the disorder in this family was 54.9 years, with a range of 45 to 63 years. The average duration of disease in 5 individuals on whom data were available was 9.2 years. Although impaired memory abilities were reported, problems with judgment and problem solving, perseveration, lack of insight, and poor social awareness were more prominent.
Murrell et al. (1997) described an autosomal dominant presenile dementia affecting 39 individuals in 7 generations. In the affected members of the family, clinical symptoms began at an average age of approximately 48 years. The presenting clinical features included disequilibrium, neck stiffness, dysphagia, and memory loss. As the disease progressed, further cognitive decline, superior gaze palsy, and dystaxia were also observed. The average duration from onset of symptoms to death was approximately 10 years.
Iijima et al. (1999) described a family with presenile dementia in a mother and her 2 sons. Mean age of onset was 35 years. All 3 patients presented with personality changes progressing to impaired cognition and memory, as well as disorientation. Later, they became mute and apathetic. Iijima et al. (1999) suggested that the clinicopathologic findings were different from those usually described with FTDP17, even though they found a ser305-to-asn amino acid substitution in the tau gene (157140.0010; see MOLECULAR GENETICS). They thought that the features in their family resembled those found in sporadic corticobasal degeneration. They pointed to the report by Brown et al. (1996) of a case of familial corticobasal degeneration with similarities to their family.
Wilhelmsen et al. (2004) reported a family in which at least 6 members spanning 2 generations had a neurodegenerative illness comprising frontotemporal dementia and features of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FTD-ALS). Four other members were reportedly affected. Frank disease onset was in the sixth decade, with a rapid progression to death within a few years; however, some patients showed frontal and anterior temporal lobe dysfunction from earlier in life. Variable clinical features included personality changes, cognitive decline, and variable motor dysfunction characterized by weakness, dysarthria, hyperreflexia, and/or parkinsonism. Wilhelmsen et al. (2004) emphasized the motor abnormalities in this family and noted that the predilection for ALS, not dementia, first brought the family to neurologic attention.
Doran et al. (2007) reported a large family from Liverpool, England, in which 8 individuals had frontotemporal dementia associated with the MAPT intron 10 +16 mutation (157140.0006). All patients were initially diagnosed with Alzheimer disease because of presentation of memory deficits and word-finding difficulties. Prototypic features of frontotemporal dementia, such as disinhibition and personality changes, were not noted initially. Doran et al. (2007) noted the phenotypic variability of this mutation.
Josephs et al. (2009) suggested that there are 2 distinct subtypes of right temporal variant frontotemporal dementia, in which the right temporal lobe is the most atrophic region on brain imaging. Among 20 individuals with these imaging findings, 12 had the behavioral variant of FTD, and 8 had semantic dementia. In the behavioral variant group, the most common features were personality change and inappropriate behavior, whereas in the semantic dementia group, the most common features were prosopagnosia, word-finding difficulties, comprehension problems, and topographagnosia. Brain imaging also showed that the behavioral variant group had greater volume loss in the frontal lobes compared to the semantic group, whereas the semantic group showed greater fusiform loss. All 8 behavioral variant patients with pathologic/genetic studies showed abnormalities in the tau protein, including 7 with MAPT mutations, whereas all 3 with semantic dementia studied showed abnormalities in TDP43. These findings suggested that there may be 2 subtypes of right temporal variant frontotemporal dementia.
Neuropathologic Findings
Neuropathologic examination of 6 affected family members by Lynch et al. (1994) demonstrated frontotemporal atrophy and neuronal loss superficial (layer 2) spongiform change, and neuronal loss with gliosis in the substantia nigra and amygdala. Anterior horn cell loss was found in each of the 2 spinal cords examined. One of these was from a person with signs and symptoms of amyotrophy.
Yamaoka et al. (1996) performed full neuropathologic study of 1 member of a family with FLDEM (subject 37), with onset at age 45. Gross examination of the brain showed mild atrophy of the frontal, parietal, and occipital lobes, with moderate atrophy of the temporal lobe. There was severe ventricular dilatation. On microscopic examination, the distribution of cell loss was moderate to severe in the midbrain, amygdala, and entorhinal cortex, with variable involvement in the neocortex. The substantia nigra showed severe neuronal loss and moderate pigment incontinence. Lewy bodies and other inclusions were absent. Limited pathology reports available on 2 other subjects showed neuronal loss and gliosis most prominent in the temporal lobe, the third nerve nucleus, and the substantia nigra. Senile plaques, tangles, and Pick bodies were not seen.
In 9 affected individuals reported by Murrell et al. (1997), neuropathologic studies showed neuronal loss in several areas of the central nervous system, as well as argentophilic tau-immunopositive inclusions in neurons and in oligodendroglia.
Reed et al. (1998) presented the neuropathologic findings in affected members of the PPND kindred reported by Wszolek et al. (1992). Features included abundant ballooned neurons in neocortical and subcortical regions as well as tau-positive inclusions. Electron microscopy showed that the abnormal tau proteins formed flat twisted ribbons similar to those observed in corticobasal degeneration. Reed et al. (1998) concluded that PPND could be subcategorized into the tauopathy group of chromosome 17-linked neurodegenerative disorders.
Hutton et al. (1998) pointed out that most cases of frontotemporal dementia show neuronal and/or glial inclusions that stain positively with antibodies raised against the microtubule-associated protein tau, although the tau pathology varies considerably in both its quantity (or severity) and characteristics. The pathologic heterogeneity among families with FTD was emphasized by McKhann et al. (2001) and by Morris et al. (2001).
Neuropathologic examination of 1 affected family member with FTD-ALS by Wilhelmsen et al. (2004) showed cortical atrophy, atrophy of the hippocampus and amygdala, depigmentation of the substantia nigra and locus ceruleus, and both alpha-synuclein (SNCA; 163890) and tau inclusions. No mutations were identified in the MAPT gene. Protein analysis showed that the insoluble tau consisted predominantly of the 4R/0N isoform. Linkage analysis suggested a disease locus on chromosome 17q between markers D17S1862 and D17S928 (lod score of 2.05), distal to the MAPT gene.
Forman et al. (2006) performed a clinicopathologic assessment of 124 patients with either a clinical or pathologic diagnosis of frontotemporal dementia. Neuropathologic examination showed that 46% had a tauopathy, 29% had FTLD with ubiquitin inclusions, and 17% had findings consistent with Alzheimer disease. Patients with FTLD with ubiquitin inclusions were more likely to present with social and language dysfunction; tauopathies were more commonly associated with an extrapyramidal disorder; and AD was associated with greater deficits in memory and executive function.
**{Parkinson disease, susceptibility to}, 168600 (3), AD, Multifactorial**
Parkinson disease was first described by James Parkinson in 1817. It is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder after Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300), affecting approximately 1% of the population over age 50 (Polymeropoulos et al., 1996).
Reviews
Warner and Schapira (2003) reviewed the genetic and environmental causes of Parkinson disease. Feany (2004) reviewed the genetics of Parkinson disease and provided a speculative model of interactions among proteins implicated in PD. Lees et al. (2009) provided a review of Parkinson disease, with emphasis on diagnosis, neuropathology, and treatment.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Parkinson Disease
Several loci for autosomal dominant Parkinson disease have been identified, including PARK1 (168601) and PARK4, caused by mutation in or triplication of the alpha-synuclein gene (SNCA; 163890), respectively, on 4q22; PARK5 (191342), caused by mutation in the UCHL1 gene on 4p13; PARK8 (607060), caused by mutation in the LRRK2 gene (609007) on 12q12; PARK11 (607688), caused by mutation in the GIGYF2 gene (612003) on 2q37; PARK13 (610297), caused by mutation in the HTRA2 gene (606441) on 2p13; PARK17 (614203), caused by mutation in the VPS35 gene (601501) on 16q11; and PARK18 (614251), caused by mutation in the EIF4G1 gene (600495) on 3q27.
Several loci for autosomal recessive early-onset Parkinson disease have been identified: PARK2 (600116), caused by mutation in the gene encoding parkin (PARK2; 602544) on 6q26; PARK6 (605909), caused by mutation in the PINK1 gene (608309) on 1p36; PARK7 (606324), caused by mutation in the DJ1 gene (PARK7; 602533) on 1p36; PARK14 (612953), caused by mutation in the PLA2G6 gene (603604) on 22q13; PARK15 (260300), caused by mutation in the FBXO7 gene (605648) on 22q12-q13; PARK19A (615528) and PARK19B (see 615528), caused by mutation in the DNAJC6 gene (608375) on 1p32; and PARK20 (615530), caused by mutation in the SYNJ1 gene (604297) on 21q22.
PARK3 (602404) has been mapped to chromosome 2p13; PARK10 (606852) has been mapped to chromosome 1p34-p32; PARK16 (613164) has been mapped to chromosome 1q32. See also PARK21 (616361). A locus on the X chromosome has been identified (PARK12; 300557). There is also evidence that mitochondrial mutations may cause or contribute to Parkinson disease (see 556500). Susceptibility to the development of the more common late-onset form of Parkinson disease has been associated with polymorphisms or mutations in several genes, including GBA (606463), MAPT (157140), MC1R (155555), ADH1C (103730), and genes at the HLA locus (see, e.g., HLA-DRA, 142860). Each of these risk factors independently may have a modest effect on disease development, but together may have a substantial cumulative effect (Hamza et al., 2010).
Susceptibility to PD may also be conferred by expanded trinucleotide repeats in several genes causing other neurologic disorders usually characterized by spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA), including the ATXN2 (601517), ATXN3 (607047), TBP (600075), and ATXN8OS (603680) genes.
The diagnosis of classic idiopathic PD is primarily clinical, with manifestations including resting tremor, muscular rigidity, bradykinesia, and postural instability. Additional features are characteristic postural abnormalities, dysautonomia, dystonic cramps, and dementia. The disease is progressive and usually has an insidious onset in mid to late adulthood. Pathologic features of classic PD include by a loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) and the presence of Lewy bodies, intracellular inclusions, in surviving neurons in various areas of the brain, particularly the SN (Nussbaum and Polymeropoulos, 1997). Autosomal recessive juvenile Parkinson disease (PARK2; 600116), however, does not have Lewy body pathology (Nussbaum and Polymeropoulos, 1997).
Many other diseases, both genetic and nongenetic, have parkinsonian motor features ('parkinsonism'), which most likely result from loss or dysfunction of the dopaminergic neurons in the SN, but may or may not have Lewy bodies on pathology. Thus, accurate diagnosis may be difficult without pathologic examination. Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB; 127750) shows parkinsonism with Lewy bodies. However, parkinsonism without Lewy bodies characterizes progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP; 601104), frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism (600274), autosomal dominant (128230) and recessive (605407) forms of Segawa syndrome, X-linked recessive Filipino type of dystonia (314250), multiple systems atrophy, and cerebrovascular disease.
**Pick disease, 172700 (3), AD**
Pick disease refers to the neuropathologic finding of 'Pick bodies,' which are argyrophilic, intraneuronal inclusions, and 'Pick cells,' which are enlarged neurons. The clinical correlates of Pick disease of brain include those of frontotemporal dementia, which encompass the behavioral variant of FTD, semantic dementia, and progressive nonfluent aphasia (summary by Piguet et al., 2011).
Kertesz (2003) suggested the term 'Pick complex' to represent the overlapping syndromes of FTD, primary progressive aphasia (PPA), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), progressive supranuclear palsy (601104), and FTD with motor neuron disease. He noted that frontotemporal dementia may also be referred to as 'clinical Pick disease,' and that the term 'Pick disease' should be restricted to the pathologic finding of Pick bodies.
Munoz-Garcia and Ludwin (1984) studied 6 sporadic cases of dementia with lobar atrophy and neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions. They recognized 2 types on the basis of involvement of subcortical structures, the distribution and the histochemical, immunochemical and ultrastructural characteristics of the inclusions, and possibly age of onset. No reference to familial occurrence was made.
Dermaut et al. (2004) reported a 54-year-old patient with a 2-year history of personality and behavioral changes, including loss of initiative, apathy, emotional blunting, and frontal disinhibition. Brain MRI showed severe cortical and subcortical atrophy in the frontal and temporal lobes. The disorder progressed until death at age 62 years. Neuropathologic examination showed severe neuronal loss and ovoid tau-positive argyrophilic intraneuronal inclusions consistent with Pick bodies. Beta-amyloid (see APP; 104760) plaques were not detected. Four sibs were affected; 1 was clearly affected and 3 others showed signs of early-onset cognitive decline.
Piguet et al. (2011) retrospectively analyzed the clinical features of 21 patients with a neuropathologic diagnosis of Pick disease. None had a family history of the disorder. The age at onset ranged from 42 to 70 years, with a mean of 60. Duration between symptom onset and death also varied between 2 to 16 years, with a mean of 9 years. Six patients survived for over 12 years. At the time of presentation, 13 (62%) had a clinical diagnosis of behavioral variant FTD and 8 (38%) had language variant FTD, including 4 with progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA), 3 with semantic dementia, and 1 with global aphasic features. Disease duration was significantly longer in those with language variant FTD. Behavioral variant FTD was characterized by variable degrees of executive dysfunction, rigidity, distractibility, perseveration, and memory deficits. Patients with the language variant phenotype showed impaired naming, comprehension, and speech, with rare executive or memory deficits, but most retained cognition and social skills. One patient had visuoconstructive impairment. The behavioral variant group had fewer Pick bodies in the superior frontal and inferior temporal cortices compared to the language variant group. Otherwise, there were no differences in Pick body or neuronal density measures between the groups. However, statistical principal component analysis suggested that the behavioral variant was characterized by overall Pick body density measures, as well as neuronal loss in the dentate gyrus and CA1 region of the hippocampus, whereas the language variant was influenced by decreased Pick body density and neuronal loss in the temporal lobes, as well as neuronal loss in the dentate gyrus. The data suggested that neurons containing Pick bodies are likely targets of neurodegeneration. These 21 patients were ascertained from nearly 250 FTLD cases, indicating that Pick disease is rare.
Pathologic Findings
Nakamura et al. (1994) used antibody staining to demonstrate the presence of clathrin light chains a and b, as well as neurofilament, kinesin, and synaptophysin, in Pick bodies. They suggested that this indicated impairment of axonal transport. Yasuhara et al. (1995) examined Pick disease brains immunohistochemically for expression of antigens known to be associated with Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300) lesions and found that most antibodies which label intracellular neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer disease were reactive with Pick bodies. In addition, they described 2 glial abnormalities in Pick disease: glial fibrillary tangles and granules of complement protein C4D in the hippocampal dentate fascia.
Farrer et al. (1995) demonstrated that the number of apolipoprotein E (107741) epsilon-4 alleles was inversely related to the age at onset of Pick disease. Their results suggested that epsilon-4 may be a susceptibility factor for dementia and not specifically for Alzheimer disease.
Dickson (2001) reviewed the gross, microscopic, and biochemical pathology associated with what they termed 'classic' Pick disease. Gross findings include circumscribed lobar atrophy, dilated ventricles, and attenuated, soft subcortical white matter. Microscopically, there is loss of large pyramidal neurons in the cortex, diffuse spongiosis, and gliosis. 'Pick cells,' ballooned neurons filled with granulofilamentous material, and 'Pick bodies,' round amphophilic neuronal inclusions, are found in various areas and layers of the cortex. Biochemical analysis has shown that 'Pick bodies' are composed of straight and twisted filaments containing an abnormal form of the tau protein (MAPT; 157140).
Zhukareva et al. (2002) used biochemical, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural methods to characterize pathologic tau isoform composition in 14 sporadic Pick disease brains. They found that both the microtubule-binding 3-repeat (3R) and 4-repeat (4R) isoforms are present in gray and white matter of various brain regions, particularly the cortex and hippocampus. Specifically, 7 cases had predominantly pathologic 3R isoforms, 4 cases had a mixture of 3R and 4R isoforms, and 3 cases had primarily 4R isoforms. Isolated tau filaments were primarily straight, although twisted forms were also present. Although the cases shared similar clinical and neuropathologic features, the biochemical profiles of abnormal tau were diverse.
Van Leeuwen et al. (2006) detected aberrant frameshifted proteins, APP+1 and UBB+1 (UBB; 191339), within the neuropathologic hallmarks of Alzheimer disease, as well as other MAPT-related dementias, including Pick disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, and less commonly frontotemporal dementia. Van Leeuwen et al. (2006) postulated that accumulation of APP+1 and UBB+1, which represents defective proteasome function, contributes to various forms of dementia.
Falcon et al. (2018) determined that tau filaments from patients with Pick disease consist of residues lys254-phe378 of 3R tau, which are folded differently from the tau filaments in Alzheimer disease, establishing the existence of conformers of assembled tau. The observed tau fold in the filaments of patients with Pick disease explains the selective incorporation of 3R tau in Pick bodies, and the differences in phosphorylation relative to the tau filaments of Alzheimer disease. Falcon et al. (2018) concluded that their findings showed how tau can adopt distinct folds in the human brain in different diseases, an essential step for understanding the formation and propagation of molecular conformers.
**Supranuclear palsy, progressive, 601104 (3), AD**
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is the second most frequent cause of degenerative parkinsonism. In addition to parkinsonism, the clinical symptoms include early postural instability, supranuclear gaze palsy, and cognitive decline. Neuropathologically, the disorder is characterized by abundant neurofibrillary tangles, which differ in both distribution and composition from those associated with Alzheimer disease. In progressive supranuclear palsy, the tangles are primarily localized to subcortical regions and are found in both neurons and glia, whereas in Alzheimer disease they are more widespread, largely cortical, and limited to neurons. They also have different characteristics at the ultrastructural level (Baker et al., 1999).
Kertesz (2003) suggested the term 'Pick complex' to represent the overlapping syndromes of frontotemporal dementia (FTD; 600274), primary progressive aphasia (PPA), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), progressive supranuclear palsy, and FTD with motor neuron disease. He noted that frontotemporal dementia may also be referred to as 'clinical Pick disease,' and that the term 'Pick disease' (172700) should be restricted to the pathologic finding of Pick bodies.
Genetic Heterogeneity of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy
Other loci for PSP have been mapped to chromosome 1q31 (PSNP2; 609454) and 11p12-p11 (PSNP3; 610898).
See also Parkinson-dementia syndrome and atypical progressive supranuclear palsy (260540).
Rojo et al. (1999) reported 12 pedigrees of familial progressive supranuclear palsy, confirmed by pathology in 4 probands. Pathologic diagnosis was confirmed by internationally agreed criteria. The spectrum of the clinical phenotypes in these families was variable, including 34 typical cases of PSP (12 probands plus 22 secondary cases), 3 patients with postural tremor, 3 with dementia, 1 with parkinsonism, 2 with tremor, dystonia, gaze palsy, and tics, and 1 with gait disturbance. Ros et al. (2005) provided an update on 1 of the families reported by Rojo et al. (1999). Three family members were affected. At 37 years of age, the proband developed an akinetic-rigid syndrome, gait disturbance, frequent falls, micrographia, dysarthria, eyelid apraxia, abolition of upgaze, and hyperreflexia with unilateral extensor plantar response. PET scan showed reduced striatal fluorodopa uptake. The patient showed disease progression, with axial dystonia, mutism, complete vertical gaze palsy, and dysphagia, leading to death at age 45 years. Neuropathologic examination showed atrophy of the mesencephalon, pons, striatum, and subthalamic nuclei, and depigmentation of the substantia nigra. There was tau protein accumulation in neurons and glia, primarily in the mesencephalon. Protein analysis of brain tissue detected hyperphosphorylated tau protein and overexpression of tau isoforms with 4 microtubule-binding repeats.
Nath et al. (2003) provided a detailed review of the clinical features of 187 patients with PSP in the United Kingdom. The most common symptoms included bradykinesia, falls, cognitive impairment, bulbar or language problems, and visual disturbances, such as diplopia. Other variable features included tremor, retrocollis, limb dystonia, and favorable response to levodopa. Average age at onset was 66 years, and the mean survival was 5 to 6 years.
Tuite et al. (2005) reported a family in which several members had clinical features consistent with PSP and others had features consistent with corticobasal degeneration. Neuropathologic examination of 2 affected sibs showed features of PSP in 1 sib and features of CBD in the other. Specifically, PSP features included tufted astrocytes, whereas CBD features included ballooned neurons and astrocytic plaques. Both patients had severe neuronal loss in the substantia nigra. Genetic studies of 4 affected family members demonstrated the H1/H1 tau haplotype, but no mutations in the MAPT gene were identified. There was a history of remote consanguinity, and Tuite et al. (2005) suggested a unifying genetic etiology in this family.
Donker Kaat et al. (2009) reported 176 patients who fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for PSP, including 65 possible, 91 probable, and 20 definite. The mean age at PSP onset was 66.5 years. Presenting symptoms included gait disorder with falls (65%), behavioral changes (21%), bradykinesia (20%), cognitive decline (16%), stiffness (14%), speech problems (9%), visual complaints (6%), and tremor (4%). Tremor at disease onset occurred significantly more frequently in patients with PSP who had a positive family history compared to patients who did not (9% vs 1%, p = 0.02). Neuropathologic examination of 20 patients were consistent with the diagnosis. Detailed results of 5 patients showed mild frontal atrophy and depigmentation of the substantia nigra and locus ceruleus. There was severe neuronal loss and gliosis in the pallidum, subthalamic nucleus, and substantia nigra. Immunohistochemistry with the MAPT AT8 antibody (which stains 4-repeat tau) showed neurofibrillary tangles, tufted astrocytes, and coiled bodies with threads in the striatum and caudate; a variable number of these were found in the subthalamic nucleus and thalamus. The neocortex showed a few pre-tangles and tufted astrocytes in the frontal, temporal, and parietal cortex.
Neuroradiologic Studies
Piccini et al. (2001) studied regional cerebral dopaminergic function and glucose metabolism in members of 2 large kindreds with familial PSP in an effort to identify subclinical cases. They studied 3 clinically affected PSP patients who showed significant reduction in caudate and putamen uptake of (18)F-dopa in positron emission tomography (PET) studies, along with a significant reduction in striatal, lateral, and medial premotor area and dorsal prefrontal cortex glucose metabolism. In 4 of 15 asymptomatic relatives, caudate and putamen (18)F-dopa uptake was 2.5 SDs lower than the normal mean. These 4 subjects and a fifth asymptomatic relative with normal (18)F-dopa uptake showed a significant reduction of cortical and striatal glucose metabolism in a pattern similar to that of their affected relatives.
To calculate the rate of brain atrophy in 6 patients with PSP, Josephs et al. (2006) used serial MRI scans and a technique called the 'boundary shift integral,' which calculates the integral change in the brain/CSF fluid boundary over the interior and exterior surfaces of the brain. The mean interval between baseline and final MRI scan was 3.1 years. PSP Patients had a rate of cerebral atrophy and ventricular expansion of 1.3% and 7% per year, respectively, compared to 0.4% and 1.8%, respectively, in control individuals. Josephs et al. (2006) suggested that these benchmark rates and the boundary shift integral technique could be used to monitor disease progression and response to therapy in PSP.
Clinical Variability
Nicholl et al. (2003) described a form of PSP characterized by fatal respiratory hypoventilation in 2 sibs from a consanguineous marriage. The authors called the disorder 'tauopathy and respiratory failure.' The 29-year-old pregnant sister developed dyspnea with stridor, and later had a generalized seizure that left her unconscious. Despite therapy, she died after 9 days. Her 30-year-old brother developed cough syncope, dyspnea, and central apnea, which progressed over 40 months, leading to death at age 34 years. During the illness, he showed slow smooth pursuit and impaired saccades, mild rigidity and bradykinesia, and myoclonic jerks. Neuropathologic examination showed widespread neuronal eosinophilia and pyknosis with gliosis in multiple brain regions, consistent with hypoxic brain damage. There was pervasive tau pathology in neuronal perikarya, neurites, and threads in the gray matter of the hippocampus, thalamus, and pons, but not in the cerebral cortex. Functional studies indicated that the mutated protein showed reduced binding to microtubules as well as increased fibrillization and aggregation. Both sibs carried the H1/H1 haplotype associated with PSP. Nicholl et al. (2003) commented on the unusual apparent autosomal recessive inheritance of this tauopathy. In a review of the role of tau in neurodegenerative diseases, Quadros et al. (2007) classified the disorder in the sibs reported by Nicholl et al. (2003) as PSP.
**Supranuclear palsy, progressive atypical, 260540 (3), AR**
Mata et al. (1983) described 2 brothers and a sister with a 'new' Parkinson-dementia syndrome. The disorder, characterized also by ophthalmoparesis and pyramidal signs, came on in the third decade and progressed for several years. Kyphoscoliosis was present in all 3 sibs. Examination of the brain in the sister, who died at age 31 years, showed neurofibrillary degeneration of the hippocampus, basal ganglia and brainstem nuclei. The parents were not related. The authors suggested that the disorder most closely resembled the Parkinson-dementia complex of Guam (105500) but could be distinguished by the lack of Chamorro descent (a dubious argument) and the earlier age of onset. The legend for the pedigree presented as Figure 1 stated that the father and a cousin of his were 'neurologically affected' and the authors' concluding statement was as follows: 'Although the mode of inheritance of this disease appears to be autosomal dominant with low penetrance and expression, an autosomal recessive cannot be ruled out.' No information is in fact given on the father and his cousin.
Ohara et al. (1994) described 2 of 5 sibs of first-cousin parents of Japanese descent who developed vertical ophthalmoparesis, dementia, a parkinsonian syndrome, jaw tremor, and bradykinesia. Both sibs had a poor response to levodopa. The authors referred to this syndrome as a progressive supranuclear palsy-like syndrome. Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP; 601104), also known as Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome, is a sporadic disorder of adult onset with supranuclear palsy of vertical gaze, followed by proximal rigidity and dementia. There are no Lewy bodies as in Parkinson disease, but there are large numbers of neurofibrillary tangles. The sibs described by Ohara et al. (1994) had no Lewy bodies, but did have widespread distribution of neurofibrillary tangles in a pattern more reminiscent of Alzheimer disease than of classic Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome. Unlike Alzheimer disease, however, there were no senile plaques either by conventional or by immunostaining procedures. Also unlike patients with classic Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome, the affected sibs stooped forward rather than having their head in an opisthotonic position, a distinctive feature in the sporadic disorder.
Pastor et al. (2001) reported 2 Spanish brothers with atypical supranuclear palsy born from a third-degree consanguineous marriage with atypical PSP. The proband and his brother demonstrated a remarkably similar phenotype characterized by onset in the late thirties of mild cognitive decline, inappropriate behavior, ocular movement abnormalities, and asymmetric parkinsonism. Both were found to have a homozygous mutation in the MAPT gene (157140.0021).
Rossi et al. (2004) reported a patient who developed antecollis, dysarthria, postural instability with falls, slowing of ocular movements, and increased deep tendon reflexes at age 36 years, consistent with atypical PSP.



DMPK
**Myotonic dystrophy 1, 160900 (3), AD**
Myotonic dystrophy is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized mainly by myotonia, muscular dystrophy, cataracts, hypogonadism, frontal balding, and ECG changes. The genetic defect in DM1 results from an amplified trinucleotide repeat in the 3-prime untranslated region of a protein kinase gene. Disease severity varies with the number of repeats: normal individuals have 5 to 37 repeats, mildly affected persons have 50 to 150 repeats, patients with classic DM have 100 to 1,000 repeats, and those with congenital onset can have more than 2,000 repeats. The disorder shows genetic anticipation, with expansion of the repeat number dependent on the sex of the transmitting parent. Alleles of 40 to 80 repeats are usually expanded when transmitted by males, whereas only alleles longer than 80 repeats tend to expand in maternal transmissions. Repeat contraction events occur 4.2 to 6.4% of the time (Musova et al., 2009).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Myotonic Dystrophy
See also myotonic dystrophy-2 (DM2; 602668), which is caused by mutation in the ZNF9 gene (116955) on chromosome 3q21.
ADULT-ONSET MYOTONIC DYSTROPHY
In adult-onset DM1, symptoms typically become evident in middle life, but signs can be detectable in the second decade. Bundey et al. (1970) found that the most useful method for identifying subclinical cases is slit-lamp examination for lens changes, followed by electromyography for myotonic discharges, and then by measurement of immunoglobulins.
Harper (1989) provided a monograph on myotonic dystrophy that has been updated regularly.
Unlike the other muscular dystrophies, DM initially involves the distal muscles of the extremities and only later affects the proximal musculature. In addition, there is early involvement of the muscles of the head and neck. Involvement of the extraocular muscles produces ptosis, weakness of eyelid closure, and limitation of extraocular movements. Atrophy of masseters, sternocleidomastoids, and the temporalis muscle produces a characteristic haggard appearance. Bosma and Brodie (1969) demonstrated both myotonia and weakness in patients with swallowing and speech disability. Myotonia, delayed muscular relaxation following contraction, is most frequently apparent in the tongue, forearm, and hand. Myotonia is rarely as severe as in myotonia congenita and tends to be less apparent as weakness progresses.
Many of the muscle biopsy changes are nonspecific. Most commonly there are central nuclei and ring fibers. Necrosis, regeneration, and increase of collagen are never as severe as in Duchenne muscular dystrophy. In 70% of patients there is hypotrophy of type I muscle fibers; less commonly there are markedly atrophic fibers (Casanova and Jerusalem, 1979). In many cases there are target fibers, suggesting neurogenic dysfunction, but intramuscular nerves appear histologically normal (Drachman and Fambrough, 1976). Ultrastructural studies show dilatation of T tubules or sarcoplasmic reticulum, whose contents may be unusually dense (Milhaud et al., 1964). In some cases the surface membrane may be irregular, with reduplication of basal lamina.
Neurologic Features
From a series of neurophysiologic investigations of 24 patients with myotonic dystrophy, Jamal et al. (1986) concluded that there was unequivocal evidence of widespread nervous system dysfunction. In many patients there was significant involvement of peripheral large diameter motor and sensory fibers and of small diameter sensory fibers peripherally and/or centrally. The authors stated that 'the concept of myotonic dystrophy as a pure myopathy can no longer be sustained.' This conclusion is supported by the findings in the family reported by Spaans et al. (1986). Thirteen members of a large family presented with a hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy in a dominant pedigree pattern. The mean motor conduction velocities for the median and peroneal nerves in the affected individuals were 62% and 56%, respectively, of those of the unaffected relatives. Eight of the 13 affected members also showed more or less prominent signs of myotonic dystrophy. There was no case of myotonic dystrophy alone.
Turnpenny et al. (1994) found that IQ in myotonic dystrophy declined as the age of onset of signs and symptoms decreased and as the size of the CTG expansion increased. The correlation appeared to be more linear with age of onset. Censori et al. (1994) carried out a prospective case-control study of 25 patients with myotonic dystrophy using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain. They found that 84% of myotonic dystrophy patients showed white matter hyperintense lesions, compared with 16% of controls. Most of these lesions involved all cerebral lobes without hemispheric prevalence, but 28% of the myotonic dystrophy patients also showed particular white matter hyperintense lesions at their temporal poles. Myotonic patients also showed significantly more cortical atrophy than did controls. However, there was no relationship between atrophy or white matter hyperintense lesions and age, disease duration, or neuropsychologic impairment. Damian et al. (1994) found that amplification of the CTG repeat in leukocytes strongly correlated with cognitive test deficits when the expansion length exceeded over 1,000 trinucleotides. MRI lesions were associated with impaired psychometric performance, but the MRI findings of subcortical white matter lesions correlated only very weakly with the molecular findings.
Miaux et al. (1997) found that 9 (70%) of 13 patients with a mild form of adult myotonic dystrophy had T2-weighted signal abnormalities on brain MRI. Four patients (30%) had lesions greater than 1 cm in diameter. Lesions were symmetric, occurred in the subcortical white matter, and showed a predilection for the temporal lobe. There was some evidence of cerebral atrophy in the patients overall but no difference in IQ between patients and controls. There was no correlation between number of pathologic CTG repeats and white matter lesions, and there was no correlation between intellectual impairment and white matter lesions, except in 1 patient who had a difficult birth and temporal lobe epilepsy. Three patients had marked thickening of the skull, which was associated with ossification of the falx in 2.
Donahue et al. (2009) reported a 56-year-old woman with a 10-year history of myotonic dystrophy who presented with progressive lower extremity weakness. Brain MRI showed multiple discrete and confluent areas of abnormal signal intensity throughout the subcortical white matter with predominant involvement of the frontal and anterior temporal lobes. There was also diffuse thickening of the skull with ossification of the falx. Donahue et al. (2009) noted the similarity of the white matter findings with those observed in CADASIL (125310), but noted that skull abnormalities are not seen in CADASIL.
In a study of 21 patients with myotonic dystrophy, Akiguchi et al. (1999) found that MRI results indicated progressive brain atrophy. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy demonstrated a significant reduction of the neuronal marker N-acetylaspartate, even in young patients in whom imaging studies were still equivocal.
Delaporte (1998) found that 15 DM patients with no or minimal muscle weakness demonstrated a homogeneous personality profile characterized by avoidant, obsessive-compulsive, passive-aggressive, and schizotypic traits. Fourteen healthy control individuals and 12 patients with a mild form of muscle disease did not show the same trait homogeneity. Delaporte (1998) concluded that the personality disorders were not attributable to the adjustment to a disabling condition, but rather were primary manifestations of the genetic mutation.
Modoni et al. (2004) performed detailed neuropsychologic testing of 70 patients with DM1, including 10 with congenital onset and 60 with juvenile-adult onset, who were subdivided into 4 genotypic subgroups according to number of repeat expansion. Patients with congenital onset (CTG repeats greater than 1,000) obtained the lowest scores in verbal attainment, frontal and executive functions, and general intelligence, consistent with mental retardation. Patients with 50 to 150 repeats showed age-dependent impairment in memory, frontal lobe, and temporal lobe function. Patients with 151 to 1,000 repeats showed defects only in frontal and executive tasks. Although there was a correlation between number of repeats and degree of muscle involvement for all patients, there was not a significant correlation between number of repeats and cognitive impairment, except for the congenital group.
Sergeant et al. (2001) stated that neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), as described in patients with Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300), had been described in the neocortex and subcortical regions of patients with DM1. NFTs derive from pathologic aggregation of hyperphosphorylated tau (MAPT; 157140) proteins. By neuropathologic examination, Sergeant et al. (2001) identified hippocampal NFTs in 4 of 5 patients with DM1 ranging in age from 42 to 64 years. Three patients had clinical evidence of cognitive impairment or mental retardation. In some of the patients, other brain regions also had NFTs. Biochemical characterization showed overexpression of tau protein isoforms lacking exons 2 and 3, suggesting that the DMPK mutation disrupts normal MAPT isoform expression and alters the maturation of MAPT pre-mRNA. Maurage et al. (2005) identified biochemically similar NFTs in multiple brain regions of a patient with DM2; however, the patient with DM2 was mentally normal, demonstrated no cognitive decline, and died at age 71 years from a bilateral renal thrombosis.
Cardiac Features
Hawley et al. (1983) suggested that the tendency to have heart block or arrhythmia with myotonic dystrophy is a familial characteristic. The implication was that there may be 2 forms of myotonic dystrophy. They studied 18 families and found heart block in 4.
In a single large kindred, Tokgozoglu et al. (1995) compared the cardiac findings in 25 patients with myotonic dystrophy with age-matched normal family members. They found that the patients were more likely to have conduction abnormality (52% vs 9%), mitral valve prolapse (32% vs 9%), and wall motion abnormality (25% vs 0%). Left ventricular ejection fractions and stroke volume were reduced compared with normals. Using multivariate analysis, the number of CTG repeats (range, 69 to 1367; normal, less than 38) was the strongest predictor of abnormalities in wall motion and EKG conduction. Patients with more extensive neurologic findings had a higher incidence of wall motion and/or EKG conduction abnormalities. The authors also found that the relation of mitral valve prolapse to the size of the CTG repeat was of borderline significance.
Cardiac involvement is well described in adults with myotonic dystrophy. Bu'Lock et al. (1999) undertook detailed cardiac assessment in 12 children and young adults with congenital myotonic dystrophy using control data from 137 healthy children and young adults. All patients were in sinus rhythm with a normal P wave axis. Three had first-degree heart block and 4 had a borderline P-R interval (200 ms). Four others had more complex conduction abnormalities. Three patients had mitral valve prolapse. Eleven of the 12 patients had abnormalities of 1 or more parameter of left ventricular diastolic filling. None of these patients were symptomatic. The authors commented that the prognostic implications of these findings were unclear; however, they concluded that echocardiographic assessment of left ventricular diastolic function may be a useful adjunct to electrocardiographic monitoring of patients with congenital myotonic dystrophy.
Antonini et al. (2000) performed a prospective study of 50 DM1 patients without known cardiac disease at the time of enrollment. Nineteen patients developed major cardiac abnormalities during the 56-month study. No correlation was found between CTG length and frequency of EKG abnormality or type of arrhythmia. CTG length was inversely correlated with age at onset of EKG abnormality.
Bassez et al. (2004) reported 11 DM1 patients under the age of 18 years who had severe cardiac involvement. Two patients died suddenly, 1 patient had cardiac arrest with successful resuscitation, and 1 asymptomatic 13-year-old girl presented with recurrent presyncope. Rhythm disturbances included atrial flutter in 4, ventricular tachycardia in 4, and atrial fibrillation in 1. Five patients had atrioventricular block necessitating pacemaker implantation. Six of 11 patients (55%) experienced arrhythmic events with vigorous exercise. Genetic analysis detected between 235 and 1,200 CTG repeats in all patients. No cardiac involvement was detected before age 10 years. Bassez et al. (2004) concluded that patients with congenital or childhood forms of DM1 may present with cardiac abnormalities and that exercise testing is a necessary evaluation in these patients.
Groh et al. (2008) found that 96 of 406 patients with genetically confirmed DM1 had severe ECG abnormalities, and that these patients were older, had more CTG repeats, and had more severe muscular impairment compared to those without ECG abnormalities. After a mean follow-up period of 5.7 years, 69 patients who did not have ECG abnormalities at the start of the study had developed ECG abnormalities and 81 patients died. There were 27 sudden deaths, 32 deaths from progressive neuromuscular respiratory failure, 5 nonsudden deaths from cardiac causes, and 17 deaths from other causes. The major cause of death in the cohort was respiratory failure associated with progressive muscular weakness. A severe ECG abnormality and a clinical diagnosis of atrial tachyarrhythmia conferred relative risks for sudden death of 3.30 and 5.18, respectively.
CONGENITAL MYOTONIC DYSTROPHY
Harper (1975) observed that in a small proportion of cases, myotonic dystrophy may be congenital with neonatal hypotonia, motor and mental retardation, and facial diplegia. With rare exception, it is the mother who transmits the disease. Diagnosis can be difficult if the family history is not known because muscle wasting may not be apparent, and cataracts and clinical myotonia are absent, although the latter is sometimes detectable by electromyography. Fried et al. (1975) observed that infants with neonatal myotonic dystrophy (almost always the mother is affected) have thin ribs. Talipes at birth, together with hydramnios and reduced fetal movements during pregnancy, is frequent. Respiratory difficulties are frequent and are often fatal. Those that survive the neonatal period initially follow a static course, eventually learning to walk but with significant mental retardation in 60 to 70% of cases. By age 10 they develop myotonia and in adulthood develop the additional complications described for the adult-onset disease. Roig et al. (1994) reported long-term follow-up of 18 patients diagnosed with congenital myotonic dystrophy. Three of the 18 had died, and 5 were lost to follow-up. The remaining 10 had IQs of less than 65. Universal findings were language delay, hypotonia, and delayed motor development. There was no difficulty with routine immunizations nor were there anesthetic complications observed in any of the 7 patients who underwent surgery.
Rudnik-Schoneborn et al. (1998) reviewed the obstetric histories of 26 women with myotonic dystrophy who had a total of 67 gestations, comparing gestations with affected and unaffected fetuses. Of the 56 infants carried to term, 29 had or most likely had inherited the gene for DM from their affected mothers; 18 of the 29 (61%) were affected by the congenital form of DM. Perinatal loss rate was 11% and associated with congenital DM. Preterm labor was a major problem in gestations with DM-fetuses (55 vs 20%), as was polyhydramnios (21% vs none). While forceps deliveries or vacuum extractions were required in 21% of deliveries with DM-fetuses and only 5% of unaffected fetuses, the frequency of cesarean sections were similar in the 2 groups. Obstetric problems were inversely correlated with age at onset of maternal DM, while no effect of age at delivery or birth order on gestational outcome was seen.
Stratton and Patterson (1993) established the molecular diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy in a fetus shown to have bilateral effusions and scalp and upper torso edema by ultrasound examination at 30 weeks' gestation. Polyhydramnios was also present. Thus, nonimmune hydrops fetalis is a manifestation of congenital myotonic dystrophy. The mother had previously unsuspected myotonic dystrophy, but she did show grasp myotonia. Her brother had a confirmed diagnosis. The DM gene showed marked expansion in her fetus. Stratton and Patterson (1993) found reports of 15 other cases of nonimmune hydrops fetalis associated with congenital myotonic dystrophy. (Robin et al. (1994) described nonimmune hydrops fetalis in association with severely impaired fetal movement, giving support to the notion that fetal hypomobility is a cause of this disorder. The hydropic infant stopped moving 8 weeks before delivery and did not move postnatally. Autopsy revealed extensive CNS destruction of unknown cause.)



MCM3AP
**Peripheral neuropathy, autosomal recessive, with or without impaired intellectual development, 618124 (3), AR**
Autosomal recessive peripheral neuropathy with or without impaired intellectual development is an early childhood-onset neurologic disorder characterized by slowly progressive distal motor impairment resulting in gait difficulties, often with loss of ambulation, and difficulties using the hands in most patients. Most affected individuals also have impaired intellectual development, although some have normal cognition. Electrophysiologic testing and sural nerve biopsy are most compatible with an axonal motor neuropathy; some patients may show signs of demyelination. Additional features may include eye movement abnormalities, claw hands, foot deformities, and scoliosis (summary by Ylikallio et al., 2017).
Schuurs-Hoeijmakers et al. (2013) reported a Dutch brother and sister, born of unrelated parents, with mildly impaired intellectual development, progressive polyneuropathy, cerebellar ataxia, ptosis, saccadic eye movements, hypotonia, and facial dysmorphism. The family was ascertained from a cohort of 19 nonconsanguineous families with intellectual disability that underwent exome sequencing.
Ylikallio et al. (2017) reported 9 patients from 5 unrelated families of various ethnic origins with a complex neurologic disorder beginning in infancy or early childhood. The patients ranged in age from 3 to 28 years. Initial features included hypotonia and mildly delayed motor development with most patients achieving walking by age 2 years, although 2 unrelated patients achieved walking at age 4 years. Almost all patients lost independent ambulation between 10 and 24 years and became wheelchair-bound. All patients had evidence of a sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy, and most had distal muscle atrophy and weakness and impaired distal sensation associated with decreased or absent lower limb reflexes. Electrophysiologic studies were consistent with an axonal neuropathy in most patients, but 2 brothers, born of consanguineous Turkish parents (family T), had nerve conduction studies (NCV) suggestive of a demyelinating neuropathy. Sural nerve biopsies, performed in some patients, showed loss of myelinated axons. Seven of 9 patients had mild to moderate intellectual disability with learning difficulties and often with delayed speech, but several could read and attend special schools. Brain imaging, performed in 7 patients, was normal in 4, but showed mildly increased signal intensities in the temporal lobe in 2 patients and mild ventriculomegaly and small white matter cysts in a third. Two sisters in 1 family (family C) had obesity and primary ovarian failure. Additional uncommon features, seen only in a single patient or a few patients, included extensor plantar responses, short stature, microtia with hearing impairment, strabismus, amblyopia, hypotonia, seizures, scoliosis, and distal contractures. One patient was ventilator-dependent at age 14.
Karakaya et al. (2017) reported 4 patients from 3 unrelated families with early-onset autosomal recessive peripheral neuropathy. An 8-year-old girl, born of consanguineous Kurdish parents (family A), had delayed motor development, gait difficulties, ophthalmoplegia, and strabismus. She was able to walk at age 4 years. Physical examination showed distal muscle atrophy and weakness of the upper and lower limbs, absent reflexes, and scoliosis. Nerve conduction studies were consistent with an axonal sensorimotor neuropathy. In a second family, 2 adult sisters, born of consanguineous Iranian parents (family B), developed distal muscle atrophy and weakness in the upper and lower limbs at age 10 to 13 years. They had thenar atrophy, mild wasting of the intrinsic hand muscles, and distal spinal muscular atrophy resulting in hand weakness, writing difficulty, and claw hands. Both also had pes cavus with Achilles tendon shortness, difficulty walking with frequent falls and abnormal gait, and loss of the ability to run. Electrophysiologic studies showed low motor NCVs with normal sensory NCVs. Hearing, vision, and cognition were normal. The last patient was a 13-year-old girl who showed global developmental delay from infancy and later developed progressive distal motor impairment in childhood with difficulty walking. She had mild intellectual disability. Other features included arched feet and kyphosis. NCV was consistent with an axonal sensorimotor neuropathy, and sural nerve biopsy showed mild chronic axonal neuropathy with mild loss of large diameter axons.
Kennerson et al. (2018) reported 3 sibs, born of consanguineous Lebanese parents, with early-onset autosomal recessive peripheral neuropathy. The patients were young adults at the time of the report, but developed slowly progressive distal muscle weakness of the upper and lower limbs between ages 6 and 10 years after early normal motor development. In the teenage years, all had foot drop, wrist and finger drop, marked distal muscle atrophy, and decreased sensation to pain and temperature; vibration and proprioception were normal. The patients remained ambulatory. Electrophysiologic studies showed absent or markedly reduced compound motor action potentials and decreased motor conduction velocities, although sensory studies were basically normal. All 3 patients became obese, and 2 developed type 2 diabetes mellitus. One sib developed psychosis with catatonia, but cognition level was not reported.



TRAPPC12
**Encephalopathy, progressive, early-onset, with brain atrophy and spasticity, 617669 (3), AR**
Milev et al. (2017) reported 3 children from 2 unrelated families with severe early-onset progressive encephalopathy characterized by microcephaly, global developmental delay, and hearing loss. One patient, born of consanguineous Palestinian parents, presented with brief flexion seizures at age 5 months and subsequently showed developmental regression and stagnation with loss of smiling, visual tracking, and social overtures. EEG showed hypsarrhythmia. Family history in this patient was notable for the mother having 5 previous pregnancies ending in spontaneous abortions, a sixth terminated for multiple anomalies, and another child born at 24 weeks' gestation who died soon after birth. In the second family, 2 sisters were similarly affected. Both had small developmental gains in infancy, but then plateaued or showed regression and had severe global developmental deficits. Additional features in all patients included truncal hypotonia, appendicular spasticity, dystonia and/or myoclonus, optic atrophy or cortical visual impairment, scoliosis, and dysphagia, necessitating G-tube placement in the sisters. Brain MRI in all patients showed a similar pattern of pontine hypoplasia, partial agenesis of the corpus callosum, simplified frontal gyri, and diffuse cortical atrophy with enlarged ventricles and relative sparing of the cerebellum. Two of the 3 patients had seizures. One of the sisters died of respiratory insufficiency at age 4 years, 9 months.



RNF212
**Recombination rate QTL 1, 612042 (3)**
Recombination plays a crucial role in meiosis, ensuring the proper segregation of chromosomes. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) and sperm typing studies suggested that recombination rates vary tremendously across the human genome, with most events occurring in narrow hotspots (Coop et al., 2008).
To examine variation in fine-scale recombination patterns among individuals, Coop et al. (2008) used dense genomewide nucleotide polymorphism data collected in nuclear families to localize crossovers with high spatial resolution. This analysis revealed that overall recombination hotspot usage is similar in males and females, with individual hotspots often active in both sexes. Across the genome, roughly 60% of crossovers occurred in hotspots inferred from LD studies (on chromosomes 17, 19, 10, and 11). Notably, however, Coop et al. (2008) found extensive and heritable variation among both males and females in the proportion of crossovers occurring in these hotspots.



GRID2
**Spinocerebellar ataxia, autosomal recessive 18, 616204 (3), AR**
Autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia-18 is a neurologic disorder characterized by delayed psychomotor development, severely impaired gait due to cerebellar ataxia, ocular movement abnormalities, and intellectual disability. Brain imaging shows progressive cerebellar atrophy (summary by Hills et al., 2013).
Utine et al. (2013) reported 3 boys from a consanguineous Turkish kindred with cerebellar ataxia. The 8-year-old proband was described in detail. He presented at age 4 months with nystagmus, hypotonia, and delayed psychomotor development, and later showed unsteady gait, incoordination of gross motor movements, and dysarthria. Physical examination showed poor overall growth, rotatory nystagmus, truncal ataxia, oculomotor apraxia, pale optic disc, dysmetria, and dysdiadochokinesis. There was also evidence of pyramidal tract involvement, with hyperreflexia and extensor plantar responses. Serial brain imaging showed progressive cerebral and cerebellar atrophy. Two male cousins were similarly affected.
Hills et al. (2013) reported 3 children from a consanguineous Turkish family with early-onset cerebellar ataxia associated with eye movement abnormalities and intellectual disability. All patients had delayed psychomotor development with hypotonia, truncal and appendicular ataxia, and difficulty walking; 1 patient was wheelchair-bound at age 14 years. All patients also showed occasional or persistent tonic upgaze and nystagmus. Speech was severely limited. An unrelated child of Mexican descent, born of unrelated parents, had a similar phenotype. Brain imaging of 1 patient from the Turkish family and the Mexican patient showed progressive and severe cerebellar atrophy mainly affecting the flocculus. None of the patients had seizures or dysmorphic features.



EIF4E
**{Autism, susceptibility to, 19}, 615091 (3)**



HACE1
**Spastic paraplegia and psychomotor retardation with or without seizures, 616756 (3), AR**
Spastic paraplegia and psychomotor retardation with or without seizures is an autosomal recessive complex neurodevelopmental disorder with onset in infancy. Affected children show hypotonia followed by severely impaired global development and significant motor disability. Most develop seizures in childhood and have speech delay. Other features, such as ocular abnormalities, foot deformities, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, and decreased white matter, are more variable (summary by Hollstein et al., 2015).
Hollstein et al. (2015) reported 8 individuals from 2 unrelated families with a complex neurodevelopmental disorder. The patients ranged in age from 3 to 22 years. One family was consanguineous and from Pakistan, whereas the other was of German descent and contained 3 affected sibs. All patients showed hypotonia at birth followed by delayed psychomotor development and slowly progressive lower limb spasticity and/or ataxia resulting in significantly impaired mobility: 3 used a wheelchair or were bedridden, 2 were mobile over short distances, and the 3 German sibs had an unstable waddling gait. Five patients had seizures, most commonly myoclonic seizures. Other more variable features included ocular abnormalities, such as strabismus, myopia, and retinal dystrophy, dysarthria, and dystonic posturing. Three patients had sensorineural hearing loss. Brain imaging showed cerebral atrophy in 3 patients and hypoplastic corpus callosum in 2 others. Some patients had skeletal abnormalities, including kyphosis, scoliosis, hip dislocation, and foot deformities. Patients in the Pakistani family had a large head circumference at birth and hypoplastic genitalia in most males; in addition, the patients were overweight and doubly incontinent.
Akawi et al. (2015) reported 6 patients from 4 unrelated families with SPPRS. Three of the families were consanguineous. All patients had severely delayed psychomotor development with significant speech delay; only 1 patient was able to walk independently. The neuromuscular phenotype included truncal hypotonia and mixed spastic and dystonic tetraparesis. Brain imaging showed decreased white matter and delayed myelination in 2 patients, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum in 2 other patients. Four patients had seizures, 4 were obese, 3 had short stature, and 2 had microcephaly. Mild facial dysmorphic features, such as hypertelorism, deep-set eyes, and downturned corners of the mouth, were observed in some patients, although there was no consistent pattern of abnormalities.



RELN
**{Epilepsy, familial temporal lobe, 7}, 616436 (3), AD**
Familial temporal lobe epilepsy-7 is a form of autosomal dominant lateral temporal lobe epilepsy characterized by focal seizures with prominent auditory symptoms (summary by Dazzo et al., 2015).
For a general description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of familial temporal lobe epilepsy, see 600512.
Dazzo et al. (2015) reported 7 unrelated families with autosomal dominant lateral temporal lobe epilepsy. Affected individuals had focal epilepsy with auras consistent with a lateral temporal origin; auras were mainly auditory and manifest as ringing, humming, sounds, voices, or music. Some patients had receptive-aphasic symptoms. No structural insults to the temporal region were detected.
**Lissencephaly 2 (Norman-Roberts type), 257320 (3), AR**
Dobyns et al. (1984) suggested the designation Norman-Roberts syndrome for a disorder which, like the Miller-Dieker syndrome (247200), is associated with type I lissencephaly but has distinctive associated features. (Type I lissencephaly is characterized by microcephaly and a thickened cortex with 4 rather than 6 layers.) This disorder, first reported by Norman et al. (1976), shows a low sloping forehead and a prominent nasal bridge, features not seen in the Miller-Dieker syndrome. Furthermore, chromosomes are normal whereas in the latter syndrome an abnormality of 17p13 has been found. Dobyns et al. (1984) published photographs demonstrating the craniofacial features of the Norman-Roberts syndrome. Multiple affected sibs and parental consanguinity have been observed.
Iannetti et al. (1993) described a 7-year-old boy with microcephaly, bitemporal hollowing, low sloping forehead, slightly prominent occiput, widely set eyes, broad and prominent nasal bridge, and severe postnatal growth deficiency. Neurologic features included hypertonia, hyperreflexia, seizures, and profound mental retardation. Brain MRI showed changes consistent with lissencephaly type I, grade 2. Molecular studies did not demonstrate deletion in the Miller-Dieker/isolated lissencephaly critical region on 17p.
Hong et al. (2000) studied an autosomal recessive form of lissencephaly associated with severe abnormalities of the cerebellum, hippocampus, and brainstem in 2 consanguineous pedigrees. The first consisted of British parents related as half first cousins (Hourihane et al., 1993). At birth the 3 affected children showed normal head size, congenital lymphedema, and hypotonia. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed moderate lissencephaly and profound cerebellar hypoplasia. Cognitive development was delayed, with little or no language and no ability to sit or stand unsupported. There was also myopia, nystagmus, and generalized seizures that could be controlled with medication. A second pedigree from Saudi Arabia consisted of first-cousin parents, with 3 affected offspring. The affected children showed severe delay in neurologic and cognitive development, hypotonia, and epilepsy.
Caksen et al. (2004) described 2 Turkish infants with Norman-Roberts syndrome. Both patients had typical craniofacial abnormalities and abnormal magnetic resonance imaging findings, but no deletion in 17p13.3, typical of Miller-Dieker syndrome.



RNF139
**Renal cell carcinoma, 144700 (3)**
The Heidelberg histologic classification of renal cell tumors subdivides renal cell tumors into benign and malignant parenchymal neoplasms and, where possible, limits each subcategory to the most common documented genetic abnormalities (Kovacs et al., 1997). Malignant tumors are subclassified into common or conventional renal cell carcinoma (clear cell); papillary renal cell carcinoma; chromophobe renal cell carcinoma; collecting duct carcinoma, with medullary carcinoma of the kidney; and unclassified renal cell carcinoma. The common or conventional type accounts for about 75% of renal cell neoplasms and is characterized genetically by a highly specific deletion of chromosome 3p. Papillary renal cell carcinoma (see 605074) accounts for about 10% of renal cell tumors. Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma accounts for approximately 5% of renal cell neoplasms. Genetically, chromophobe RCC is characterized by a combination of loss of heterozygosity of chromosomes 1, 2, 6, 10, 13, 17, and 21 and hypodiploid DNA content. Collecting duct carcinoma accounts for about 1% of renal cell carcinoma.
Renal cell carcinoma occurs nearly twice as often in men as in women; incidence in the United States is equivalent among whites and blacks. Cigarette smoking doubles the likelihood of renal cell carcinoma and contributes to as many as one-third of cases. Obesity is also a risk factor, particularly in women. Other risk factors include hypertension, unopposed estrogen therapy, and occupational exposure to petroleum products, heavy metals, or asbestos (summary by Motzer et al., 1996).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Renal Cell Carcinoma
Germline mutation resulting in nonpapillary renal cell carcinoma of the clear cell and chromophobe type occurs in the HNF1A gene (142410) and the HNF1B gene (189907).
Somatic mutations in renal cell carcinomas occur in the VHL gene (608537), the TRC8 gene (603046), the OGG1 gene (601982), the ARMET gene (601916), the FLCN gene (607273), and the BAP1 gene (603089).
See also RCCX1 (300854) for a discussion of renal cell carcinoma associated with translocations of chromosome Xp11.2 involving the TFE3 gene (314310).
For a discussion of papillary renal cell carcinoma, see RCCP1 (605074).
Occurrence of Renal Cell Carcinoma in Other Disorders
Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300) is a familial multicancer syndrome in which there is a susceptibility to a variety of neoplasms, including renal cell carcinoma of clear cell histology and renal cysts. A syndrome of predisposition to uterine leiomyomas and papillary renal cell carcinoma has been reported (605839). Medullary carcinoma of the kidney is believed to arise from the collecting ducts of the renal medulla and is associated with sickle cell trait (603903) (Kovacs et al., 1997). Renal cell carcinoma occurs in patients with the Birt-Hogg-Dube syndrome (135150).
Bertolotto et al. (2011) identified a missense mutation in the MITF (156845) gene that increases the risk of renal cell carcinoma with or without malignant melanoma (CMM8; 614456).
Familial renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is relatively rare. Reports (e.g., Franksson et al., 1972; Goldman et al., 1979) suggest an early average age at diagnosis and frequent bilateral or multiple primary tumors in familial cases. Rusche (1953) observed hypernephroma in 2 brothers. Both had distant metastasis as the first manifestation and both were in their early thirties at the time of diagnosis. Brinton (1960) described a family in which 2 brothers and a sister had hypernephroma. The father had died of kidney tumor and the mother of cancer, site unstated. One of the patients had polycythemia, a known accompaniment of hypernephroma on occasion. It should be noted that hypernephroma and cerebellar hemangioblastoma, which histologically resembles hypernephroma, are features of von Hippel-Lindau disease. Polycythemia also occurs with cerebellar hemangioblastoma.
Jakesz and Wuketich (1978) reported an instructive family in which 3 brothers had bilateral renal cell carcinoma. The index case also had cerebellar hemangioblastoma. The authors suggested that von Hippel-Lindau disease was the fundamental problem. Braun et al. (1975) studied 3 families, each with multiple cases of renal cell carcinoma. There appeared to be an association with HLA W17 tissue type.
Li et al. (1982) reviewed 9 families in which 2 or more members had renal carcinoma. Multiple generations were affected in 5, sibs in 4. The median age at diagnosis was a decade earlier than usual, and individual patients had bilateral or multifocal lesions; these are features of hereditary forms of diverse cancers. No patient had von Hippel-Lindau disease and none had 3;8 translocation.
Levinson et al. (1990) reported that, since 1961, 28 families with multiple cases of renal cell carcinoma had been reported, with an abnormality in the constitutional karyotype having been found in only 1 family. They identified 5 more families in which a total of 12 relatives had renal cell carcinoma; peripheral blood karyotypes from 7 patients and 5 unaffected relatives showed no significant abnormalities. They suggested that members of families with multiple cases of renal cell carcinoma be screened with renal ultrasound initially at age 30, with repeat examinations every 2 or 3 years. The recommendations are similar to those for von Hippel-Lindau disease.
Woodward et al. (2000) reported a clinical and molecular study of familial renal cell carcinoma in 9 kindreds with 2 or more cases of renal cell carcinoma in first-degree relatives. Familial RCC was characterized by an earlier age at onset (mean 47.1 years, 52% of cases less than 50 years of age) as compared to sporadic cases. Mutation analysis of the VHL (608537), MET (164860), and CUL2 (603135) genes revealed no germline mutations. Woodward et al. (2000) concluded that the VHL, MET, and CUL2 genes do not have a major role in familial renal cell carcinoma.



KANK1
**Cerebral palsy, spastic quadriplegic, 2, 612900 (3)**
Lerer et al. (2005) described a nonconsanguineous 4-generation Israeli family of Jewish Moroccan origin in which 9 children were affected with a congenital neurodegenerative disease resembling cerebral palsy. Congenital hypotonia evolved over the first year to spastic quadriplegia with accompanying transient nystagmus. All affected individuals had varying degrees of mental retardation. Neuroimaging studies showed brain atrophy and ventriculomegaly. No biochemical abnormalities were detected. All affected children were born to related clinically healthy fathers, indicating that inheritance was dependent on parental gender.





LAMA2
**Muscular dystrophy, congenital, merosin deficient or partially deficient, 607855 (3), AR**
Merosin-deficient congenital muscular dystrophy is an autosomal recessive form of muscular dystrophy characterized by muscle weakness apparent at birth or in the first 6 months of life. Patients show hypotonia, poor suck and cry, and delayed motor development; most never achieve independent ambulation. Most patients also have periventricular white matter abnormalities on brain imaging, but mental retardation and/or seizures occur only rarely (summary by Xiong et al., 2015).
Tome et al. (1994) observed a specific absence of merosin, the laminin isoform in skeletal muscle, and a marked increase in endomysial connective tissue in 13 patients with congenital muscular dystrophy. Tome et al. (1994) investigated laminin because it is linked to the subsarcolemmal cytoskeleton by a large oligomeric complex of dystrophin (300377)-associated glycoproteins.
Sunada et al. (1995) described 2 unrelated Caucasian patients with merosin-negative congenital muscular dystrophy presenting with extensive brain abnormalities, including polymicrogyria and abnormal high-intensity signals in supratentorial white matter on T2-weighted brain MRIs.
Mercuri et al. (1995) studied 17 unrelated individuals with congenital muscular dystrophy. All 7 of the merosin-deficient patients had abnormal white matter changes visible on MRI of the brain and abnormal somatosensory evoked potentials (SEP). In contrast, no MRI or SEP changes were found in the merosin-positive patients. In a following companion study, Mercuri et al. (1995) consistently found perceptuo-motor difficulties in those patients with abnormal MRI scans, but not in congenital muscular dystrophy children who were merosin positive and who had normal MRI scans.
Hayashi et al. (1995) identified 1 patient with merosin-negative congenital muscular dystrophy among 40 Japanese patients, both by immunocytochemical and biochemical examination. One 16-month-old girl had delayed motor milestones, generalized hypotonia, weakness, and diffuse low-density areas in the cerebral white matter. No laminin alpha-2 chain mRNA was detected by RT-PCR, but the presumed mutation in this gene was not delineated. Thus, Hayashi et al. (1995) concluded that merosin-negative congenital muscular dystrophy does occur in Japan at a low frequency.
Shorer et al. (1995) demonstrated reduced motor nerve conduction velocities in 10 patients with merosin-negative congenital muscular dystrophy, but no reduction in nerve conduction velocity in 15 merosin-positive congenital muscular dystrophy cases.
Several forms of congenital muscular dystrophy, namely, FCMD, muscle-eye-brain disease (253280), and Walker-Warburg syndrome (236670), have structural brain abnormalities and associated severe mental retardation. Philpot et al. (1999) demonstrated that a range of structural malformations can also be found in a substantial number of children with merosin-deficient CMD. They reported MRI studies of 14 children with merosin-deficient CMD. All 14 cases had white matter changes, which appeared after the first 6 months of life and persisted with time. The changes were diffuse and the oldest child scanned (14 years) also showed involvement of the U fibers. One child with moderate mental retardation and epilepsy, characterized mainly by complex partial seizures with atypical absences, which had been difficult to treat. MRI showed marked occipital agyria and pontocerebellar hypoplasia. The gyral pattern of the rest of the brain looked normal. Four other cases, all with normal intelligence, also had cerebellar hypoplasia with variable involvement of the pons.
Taratuto et al. (1999) reported clinical, biopsy, and autopsy findings in a merosin-deficient congenital muscular dystrophy infant with abnormal cortical gyration. The brain showed polymicrogyria and occipital agyria with marginal neuroglial heterotopia and inferior vermis hypoplasia.
Pegoraro et al. (2000) reported a patient with a severe form of CMD caused by compound heterozygous mutations in the LAMA2 gene (156225.0011 and 156225.0012). She presented at birth with severe hypotonia and joint contractures. Motor milestones were severely delayed. She also had central nervous system involvement, including seizures, moderate mental retardation, ventricular dilatation, white matter abnormalities, and pachygyria. Muscle biopsy showed partial LAMA2 immunostaining, which was determined to be an alternatively spliced isoform lacking most of exon 31.
Jones et al. (2001) reported a series of 5 patients with LAMA2 deficiency and reviewed published reports to characterize its phenotype. Only 1 of the 5 patients reported had a severe classic congenital muscular dystrophy phenotype. Jones et al. (2001) noted that of previously published cases, 12% had a later onset, slowly progressive muscle weakness more accurately designated 'limb-girdle muscular dystrophy.' Mental retardation was found in 6%, seizures in 8%, subclinical cardiac involvement in 3 to 35%, and neuronal migration defects in 4%. At least 25% of the reported cases had achieved independent ambulation. Three patients with LAMA2 deficiency were asymptomatic; 10 had normal MRI, 4 of whom had mutations in the LAMA2 gene. Between 10% and 20% of cases had maximum recorded creatine kinase of less than 1000 units per liter. LAMA2 gene mutations had been identified in 25% of cases, and 68% of these had the classic congenital muscular dystrophy phenotype. Jones et al. (2001) concluded that all dystrophic muscle biopsies, regardless of clinical phenotype, should be studied with antibodies to LAMA2.
Xiong et al. (2015) reported the clinical features and genetic analysis of 43 children or teens, mostly of Han Chinese descent, with congenital muscular dystrophy and LAMA2 deficiency apparent on skeletal muscle biopsy. Most (29 patients) had hypotonia and weak cry apparent at birth, whereas the remaining patients showed these symptoms and delayed motor development within the first 6 months of life. Thirty-eight patients never achieved independent ambulation, and 5 had mild muscle weakness with impaired gait. Ophthalmoplegia was identified in 23 patients. Brain imaging of all patients showed abnormal T2 intensities in the bilateral periventricular white matter with sparing of the corpus callosum, internal capsule, cerebellum, and brainstem. Eight patients with mental retardation and/or epilepsy had more diffuse white matter abnormalities. Cortical malformations were not observed. Genetic analysis identified biallelic mutations or deletions in the LAMA2 gene; there were no apparent genotype/phenotype correlations.
**Muscular dystrophy, limb-girdle, autosomal recessive 23, 618138 (3), AR**
Autosomal recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy-23 is characterized by slowly progressive proximal muscle weakness primarily affecting the lower limbs and resulting in gait difficulties. Age at onset generally ranges from childhood to mid-adulthood. Additional features include white matter abnormalities on brain imaging, increased serum creatine kinase, and dystrophic features, with partial LAMA2 deficiency on muscle biopsy. Some patients may have additional neurologic features, including executive deficits, seizures, and peripheral neuropathy. Patients remain ambulatory well into adulthood (summary by Gavassini et al., 2011 and Chan et al., 2014).
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of autosomal recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, see LGMDR1 (253600).
Gavassini et al. (2011) reported 5 patients from 4 families with LGMDR23. The phenotype was highly variable, but all patients remained ambulant between 17 and 65 years of age. Four patients had normal motor development, whereas 1 patient had delayed walking at 2 years of age. The age at onset was reported to be between 10 and 59 years, but 1 patient had onset at age 14 months. Features included proximal muscle weakness in the upper and lower limbs, difficulty climbing stairs and running, waddling gait, Gowers sign, and muscle cramps, as well as increased serum creatine kinase. Three patients had calf hypertrophy. Neurologic involvement was also variable: all patients had nonprogressive diffuse white matter abnormalities on brain imaging, 3 had deficits in executive function or cognition, 2 had controlled seizures, and 2 had possible seizures. Muscle biopsy showed partial and variably decreased immunostaining for LAMA2 as well as increased immunostaining for LAMA5 (601033).
Chan et al. (2014) reported an 11-year-old girl with LGMDR23. She had normal early motor development, but had transient unilateral ptosis in early childhood. At age 5, she was noted to be clumsy and slow, and later showed difficulty running, jumping, climbing stairs and lifting heavy objects, but remained ambulatory. Her initial assessment, including electrophysiologic studies, was consistent with a demyelinating sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy. Physical examination showed proximal weakness of the upper and lower limbs, areflexia, distal hand wasting, Gowers sign, elbow contractures, and mild kyphosis. Sensation, proprioception, and vibration sensation were intact. She had decreased nerve conduction velocities as well as signs of chronic reinnervation and axonal degeneration. Muscle biopsy showed dystrophic features, including increased fiber size variation, increased fat and connective tissue, and internal nuclei. Immunostaining of skeletal muscle sample showed partial LAMA2 deficiency in both muscle fibers and intramuscular motor nerves. Serum creatine kinase was increased, and brain imaging showed white matter abnormalities.
Lokken et al. (2015) reported 1 new patient (patient 7) with LGMDR23. This woman showed delayed motor development before 1 year of age, but presented with LGMD at age 32. She was able to walk and run and remained ambulatory as an adult, but she had a positive Gowers sign. Serum creatine kinase was increased, and muscle biopsy showed mild dystrophic and myopathic changes as well as partial LAMA2 deficiency. Brain imaging showed white matter abnormalities; cognition was normal.



CAMTA1
**Cerebellar ataxia, nonprogressive, with mental retardation, 614756 (3), AD**
Nonprogressive cerebellar ataxia with mental retardation is an autosomal dominant neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by mildly delayed psychomotor development, early onset of cerebellar ataxia, and intellectual disability later in childhood and adult life. Other features may include neonatal hypotonia, dysarthria, and dysmetria. Brain imaging in some patients shows cerebellar atrophy. Dysmorphic facial features are variable (summary by Thevenon et al., 2012).
Thevenon et al. (2012) reported 2 unrelated families and an unrelated single patient with mild mental retardation and ataxia apparent from infancy. In the first family, 2 adult half sisters had mild mental retardation, attended schools for special needs, and worked at simple jobs. Both had ataxic gait with static instability; 1 had mild intention tremor. Brain MRI of both women showed mild hippocampal atrophy, simplified gyration of the dentate gyri, posterior cortical atrophy, and cerebellar atrophy. PET scan of 1 woman showed hypometabolism of several cerebral brain regions. Detailed neuropsychologic testing showed defects of rehearsal processing in episodic visual memory. One of the women had 2 affected sons, and the other had 3 affected children. All patients had mental retardation, usually with delayed psychomotor development, and all had gait instability or frank ataxia. More variable features included strabismus, infantile hypotonia, delayed speech, and myoclonic seizures of the upper arm (1 patient). Some patients had mild dysmorphic facial features, such as long face with pointed chin, bulbous nose, long philtrum, and thick lower lip. The mother of the women reportedly had mild intellectual disability. In a second family, a mother and her son and daughter were affected. All had mild intellectual disability, and the mother and daughter had ataxic gait. The 2 children had delayed psychomotor development with speech delay. One had neonatal hypotonia and the other had autistic features, poor interactive skills, and bursts of aggression. Mild facial dysmorphism was noted, including large forehead, palpebral edema, wide flat nose, short ears, small mouth, and abnormally implanted teeth. In a third family, a girl had delayed psychomotor development and features of ataxia, including ataxic gait, dysmetria, instability, and dysarthria.
Shinawi et al. (2015) reported 3 patients from 2 unrelated families with CANPMR. The probands in both families were 12-year-old boys with delayed development, intellectual disability/learning disabilities, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, ataxia, dysarthria, and poor fine motor skills. The affected mother of 1 patient had mild intellectual disability, but could drive, cook, and manage her bills. They had some mild and variable dysmorphic features, including short stature, broad forehead, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, strabismus, high-arched palate, small mouth, and low-set ears. The other proband had onset of seizures in infancy that continued throughout childhood and were partially responsive to medication. EEG showed focal epilepsy with secondary generalization. He also had aggressive behavior. Dysmorphic features included tall and broad forehead, broad nasal tip, narrow chin, and prominent ears. This patient had a family history of intellectual disability and epilepsy, but his father did not carry a CAMTA1 mutation, and DNA from the mother was unavailable. All 3 patients also had gastrointestinal problems, including reflux and constipation. Brain imaging of all 3 patients showed mild cerebellar atrophy.



RAI1
**Smith-Magenis syndrome, 182290 (3), AD, Isolated cases**
Patil and Bartley (1984) reported a 4-year-old girl with an interstitial deletion of chromosome 17p11.2. She had mental retardation, hypotonia, speech delay, small ears, conductive hearing loss, esotropia, dental enamel dysplasia, and prominent premaxilla. Cardiac examination was normal.
Smith et al. (1986) described in detail the phenotype associated with an interstitial deletion of 17p11.2 in 9 unrelated patients. Clinical features included brachycephaly, midface hypoplasia, prognathism, hoarse voice, and speech delay with or without hearing loss, psychomotor and growth retardation, and behavioral problems. A partial deletion was present in 8 patients; 1 patient with complete deletion of band 17p11.2 was more severely affected with facial malformations, cleft palate, and major anomalies of the cardiac, skeletal, and genitourinary systems. Stratton et al. (1986) described 6 additional patients with this chromosome deletion syndrome.
Greenberg et al. (1991) suggested that some SMS patients may have peripheral neuropathy since the disorder is due to deletion of an area of chromosome 17 where a form of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT1A; 118220) maps. However, they noted that no patients with CMT1A had shown signs of SMS. Among 32 SMS cases, all unrelated and all with an interstitial deletion of 17p11.2, Greenberg et al. (1991) observed broad flat midface with brachycephaly, broad nasal bridge, brachydactyly, speech delay, and a hoarse deep voice. Fifty-five percent of patients had signs suggestive of peripheral neuropathy, including decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes, pes planus or pes cavus, decreased sensitivity to pain, and decreased leg muscle mass. However, unlike patients with CMT1A, patients with SMS had normal nerve conduction velocities. Two-thirds of the patients demonstrated self-destructive behavior, including head-banging, onychotillomania (pulling out fingernails and toenails), and polyembolokoilamania (insertion of foreign bodies into their ears). Sixty-two percent of patients showed significant symptoms of sleep disturbance such as difficulty falling asleep, difficulty staying asleep, and frequent awakening during the night. Polysonographic studies in 2 patients showed absence of REM sleep. Absence of REM sleep had previously been reported in association with CMT1A; the possibility that a gene associated with REM sleep is in the proximity of the CMT1A locus had been suggested by Tandan et al. (1990). The deletion was determined to be paternal in origin in 9 patients and maternal in 6. The apparent random parental origin suggested that genomic imprinting does not play a role in expression of the SMS clinical phenotype. Greenberg et al. (1991) concluded that SMS is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome.
Moncla et al. (1991) added 3 patients to the 21 previously reported. Hearing loss had been described in 10 of 20 cases. Most had speech delay, hyperactivity, and behavioral problems. Craniofacial changes were described and pictured.
Zori et al. (1993) described an infant with del(17)(p12p11.2) and manifestations consistent with SMS. The mother, who was mosaic for the same deletion, had minor craniofacial changes as well as brachydactyly, consistent with partial manifestation.
Greenberg et al. (1996) reported on a multidisciplinary clinical study of 27 SMS patients. Significant findings included otolaryngologic abnormalities in 94%, eye abnormalities in 85%, sleep abnormalities (especially reduced REM sleep) in 75%, hearing impairment in 68% (approximately 65% conductive and 35% sensorineural), scoliosis in 65%, brain abnormalities (predominantly ventriculomegaly) in 52%, cardiac abnormalities in at least 37%, renal abnormalities (especially duplication of the collecting system) in 35%, low thyroxine levels in 29%, low immunoglobulin levels in 23%, and forearm abnormalities in 16%. The measured IQ ranged between 20 and 78, most patients falling in the moderate range of mental retardation at 40-54, although several patients scored in the mild or borderline range. Greenberg et al. (1996) noted that the diagnosis of SMS is usually secured by cytogenetic analysis during the evaluation of developmental delay and/or congenital anomalies. However, in older individuals the phenotype is distinctive enough that a diagnosis can be made by an experienced clinician before cytogenetic confirmation.



STAG1
**Mental retardation, autosomal dominant 47, 617635 (3), AD**
Lehalle et al. (2017) described 13 patients from 12 unrelated families with delayed psychomotor development and intellectual disability, mostly mild to moderate, usually with delayed speech. Three patients had severe intellectual disability, including 1 born of consanguineous parents. Most of the patients were children, but 1 was aged 15 years and another 29 years. Many patients had feeding difficulties and/or gastroesophageal reflux early in life; some had mild growth retardation. The patients shared some dysmorphic features, including deep-set eyes, a wide mouth, and a high nasal bridge; these features tended to become more apparent with age. Five patients had seizures, ranging from recurrent febrile seizures to epileptic encephalopathy (1 patient). Other more variable features included hypotonia, joint hyperlaxity, autistic features, and nonspecific brain anomalies, such as cerebral atrophy. The patients were identified from several large patient pools and data sharing from worldwide research cohorts.



SMAD3
**Loeys-Dietz syndrome 3, 613795 (3), AD**
Van de Laar et al. (2011) studied 3 unrelated Dutch families with arterial aneurysms, dissections, and/or early-onset osteoarthritis. The largest family was a 4-generation pedigree in which 12 of 22 affected individuals presented with aneurysms of the aorta, primarily at the sinus of Valsalva, but also involving the abdominal aorta and/or other arteries such as the splenic, common iliac, mesenteric, renal, vertebral, or main pulmonary artery. There was a strong history of sudden death between 35 and 69 years of age, primarily due to dissection and/or rupture of the aorta, which sometimes occurred in mildly dilated aortas. Arterial tortuosity of the cerebral, thoracic, and/or abdominal arterial tree was present in the majority of cases. Other congenital heart disease was present as well, including mitral valve abnormalities, and 5 normotensive individuals had idiopathic mild to moderate predominantly concentric left ventricular hypertrophy. Craniofacial abnormalities in affected individuals were mild and included hypertelorism, abnormal palate and/or uvula, and dental malocclusion. In contrast to other aneurysm syndromes, most affected individuals also presented with early-onset osteoarthritis, with radiologically proven osteoarthritis of 1 or more joints at a mean age of 42 years, primarily involving the knees, spine, and/or thumb base. Intervertebral disc abnormalities of the cervical and lumbar discs were commonly seen, and were detected as early as 12 years of age. The osteoarthritic changes in the hands and wrists involved the scaphotrapeziotrapecoidal, first carpometacarpal, and occasionally the metacarpophalangeal joints; in contrast with classic hand osteoarthritis, the proximal and distal interphalangeal joints were not affected. In addition, umbilical and/or inguinal hernias, velvety skin, and striae were recurring features. Varices or thread veins presented at a young age and were resistant to therapy. Ophthalmologic examination in 10 cases revealed no abnormalities. Aortic tissue that was obtained at surgery or postmortem from affected individuals in 2 of the families showed a variable degree of disorganization of the tunica media with fragmentation and loss of elastic fibers, as well as characteristic mucoid medial degeneration and accumulation of collagen in the media. The authors designated the disorder aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome (AOS).
Regalado et al. (2011) reported 5 families with mutation in the SMAD3 gene. One family, TAA549, had been reported by Regalado et al. (2011). That family had a frameshift mutation in exon 5 of the SMAD3 gene (603109.0004). Regalado et al. (2011) identified 3 additional SMAD3 mutations in 4 families. These families all segregated thoracic aortic aneurysm as an autosomal dominant trait. Some members of the family also had abdominal aortic aneurysms, iliac artery aneurysms, and intracranial aneurysms. Only 2 of 6 who were imaged had arterial tortuosity of the cerebral vessels. Seven of 25 patients reported osteoarthritis, and 2 of 25 reported degenerative disc or joint disease. In the 5 families, there were 31 individuals carrying SMAD3 mutations and 11 obligate carriers. Among these 42 individuals, 21 individuals presented with thoracic aortic aneurysm and/or dissection, 4 with intracranial aneurysm or subarachnoid hemorrhage, 2 with abdominal aortic aneurysm, and 2 with bilateral iliac aneurysms. The average age at presentation of disease was 45.1 years (42 years for thoracic aortic dissection and 51 years for intracranial aneurysms or subarachnoid hemorrhage). Regalado et al. (2011) concluded that SMAD3 mutations are responsible for 2% of familial thoracic aortic aneurysms with dissection.
Van de Laar et al. (2012) presented clinical data on 45 patients with aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome from 8 families with 8 different SMAD3 mutations. The 45 patients had a mean age of 45 years, including 6 children aged 9 to 17 years. All had at least 1 sign of the disorder. Among adult patients, 54% had presented with joint complaints with age of onset 18 to 61 years, and 46% presented with cardiovascular abnormalities with an age range of 20 to 66 years. Sudden death, aortic aneurysms, and severe mitral valve insufficiency were the most common presentation. In 3 patients the diagnosis of Marfan syndrome (154700) was made at the time of presentation on the basis of revised Ghent criteria. All 6 children were referred for initial evaluation after the disorder had been diagnosed in the family. Among the children, a 12-year-old patient presented with knee and lower back pain and imaging showed agenesis of the anterior cruciate ligaments, osteochondritis dissecans of the knee, and severe intervertebral disc degeneration. A 17-year-old boy also showed severe intervertebral disc degeneration at multiple levels, and a 16-year-old boy had tenodesis of the first metacarpophalangeal joint. Overall, 89% of patients had cardiovascular anomalies, including aneurysm or tortuosity (83%), ventricular hypertrophy (18%), atrial fibrillation (24%), mitral valve anomalies (50%), and congenital heart malformation (9%), including atrial septal defect, persistent ductus arteriosus, pulmonary valve stenosis, and bicuspid aortic valve. Osteoarthritis in at least 1 joint was present in 96% with variable joints involved; however, 77% presented with spine osteoarthritis, 92% with intervertebral disc degeneration, 56% with osteochondritis dissecans, and 85% with painful joints. Pes planus was present in 91%, and scoliosis in 61%. A minority had other skeletal anomalies associated with this phenotype, including dolichostenomelia, long slender fingers, camptodactyly, pectus deformity, and protrusio acetabulae. Hypertelorism was present in 31%; abnormal palate in 54%; abnormal uvula in 52%; velvety skin in 62%; migraine or severe headache in 50%; and varices in 58%. Other anomalies were present in a minority of patients.
Van de Laar et al. (2012) noted that atrial fibrillation and ventricular hypertrophy had not previously been reported in LDS and that both are uncommon in Marfan syndrome. They suggested that patients presenting with arterial tortuosity and symptoms of osteoarthritis, as well as those with osteoarthritis who have a family history of arterial disease or sudden death should have SMAD3 as the first gene screened. They recommended x-ray examination of the knees, total spine, and hands, particularly in thoracic aortic aneurysm disease patients with a family history of joint complaints or abnormalities.



MTOR
**Focal cortical dysplasia, type II, somatic, 607341 (3)**
Focal cortical dysplasia type II (FCORD2), or focal cortical dysplasia of Taylor (FCDT), is a cerebral developmental malformation that results in a clinical phenotype of intractable epilepsy, usually requiring surgery. FCORD2 has been classified histologically into 2 subtypes: a type without balloon cells, known as type IIA, and a type with balloon cells, known as type IIB (Palmini et al., 2004). Affected individuals have refractory seizures, usually with onset in early childhood, and may have persistent intellectual disability. Most patients require neurosurgical resection of affected brain tissue to ameliorate seizure frequency and severity (summary by Moller et al., 2016).
Taylor et al. (1971) reported distinctive neuropathologic findings in 10 patients undergoing surgery for refractory epilepsy described as 'masses of large aberrant neurons littered apparently in chaos through all but the first molecular layer.' In 7 of the 10 cases, 'balloon' cells were also present.
Wolf et al. (1995) reported 8 cases of chronic drug-resistant epilepsy that were characterized neuropathologically by large, disfigured neurons, oversized and atypical astrocytes, and ballooned multinucleated giant cells similar to those seen in tuberous sclerosis. Despite the strong histomorphologic similarity to tuberous sclerosis, the patients lacked additional features of neurocutaneous phacomatosis. High-resolution magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a hyperintense funnel-shaped subcortical lesion tapering toward the lateral ventricle on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery. Wolf et al. (1995) postulated a defect in neuronal cell migration. Surgical lesionectomy usually resulted in seizure relief.
Lawson et al. (2005) ascertained 34 cases of cortical dysplasia of Taylor from a surgical database; 15 were classified as CDT with balloon cells (CDT-BC) and 19 as CDT with dysplasia only (CDT-D). The common fundamental neuropathologic characteristic of the 2 subtypes was the presence of large, bizarre neurons (neuronal cytomegaly), which is also seen in tuberous sclerosis and hemimegalencephaly. The CDT-BC cases were characterized by a diffuse increase in cortical thickness (at least 2 times normal); no clear cortical-white matter junction due to excess 'spillover' of neurons; panlaminar diffuse replacement of cortical neurons by giant, dysmorphic, maloriented neurons; many GFAP (137780)-immunoreactive balloon cells; GFAP-immunoreactive fibrillar astrocytosis; and focal, severe white matter abnormalities. The features of CDT-D cases included multifocal laminar replacement of cortical neurons by giant, dysmorphic, maloriented neurons with no clearly defined borders; absence of GFAP-immunoreactive balloon cells; moderate astrocytosis; and generally well-preserved white matter. Lawson et al. (2005) noted that the neuropathologic findings of CDT-BC were similar to those seen in tuberous sclerosis, whereas the findings in CDT-D were similar to hemimegalencephaly, suggesting separate pathophysiologies for the 2 subtypes of CDT. MRI findings showed that nearly one-third of CDT-BC cases had normal or very subtle changes, whereas some cases showed focal cortical thickening, blurring of the gray-white margins, and white matter abnormalities. Clinically, patients with CDT presented with severe, intractable epilepsy of very early onset, multiple daily seizures, cognitive disability, and focal neurologic deficits. On the whole, patients with CDT-D had a more severe phenotype, with earlier onset, lower rate of seizure-free time after surgery, higher prevalence of hemiparesis, and lower IQ.
Siegel et al. (2005) identified 21 adult patients with FCDT who underwent surgery for medically refractory epilepsy. Most patients had seizure onset in their twenties (range, 18 to 55 years), and the most common seizure type was complex partial, often with secondary generalization. Three patients had simple partial seizures and 1 had generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Sixteen (76%) of the 21 patients were rendered seizure-free after surgery, which the authors noted was favorable compared to results of surgical intervention for patients with early-onset seizures. Seizure outcome was the same for both types IIA and IIB.
Lim et al. (2015) reported 12 unrelated patients with FCD type II associated with somatic mutations in the MTOR gene. All patients had epilepsy and underwent brain surgery between 11 months and 10 years of age. Histologic examination of resected brain tissue showed cortical dyslamination and dystrophic neurons, either with or without balloon cells, consistent with FCD type IIa or IIb. Brain imaging in some patients showed focal cortical dysplasia, whereas imaging was normal in some patients.
Nakashima et al. (2015) reported 6 unrelated patients with FCD type IIb associated with somatic mutations in the MTOR gene. The patients had onset of refractory daily seizures in the first months or years of life. Seizures were associated with EEG abnormalities and focal cortical dysplasia on brain imaging. Seizure types included complex partial seizures and secondary generalized tonic-clonic seizures. IQ before surgery was decreased in most patients, although it increased somewhat after surgery in some patients. Two patients had hemiparesis. Brain tissue from all patients was consistent with FCD type IIb with balloon cells.
Moller et al. (2016) reported 6 unrelated patients with FCD type II associated with somatic mutations in the MTOR gene. Onset of seizures occurred within the first 2 years of life in most patients, although 1 patient had onset at age 6 years. Seizure types were mainly focal and asymmetric, and EEG showed focal and multifocal abnormalities. All patients had MRI evidence of focal cortical dysplasia. All patients underwent surgical resection: affected brain tissue showed FCD type IIa in 1 patient and FCD type IIb with balloon cells in the other patients. One patient had normal cognition, 1 had memory impairment, and 4 had mild intellectual disability.
Lim et al. (2017) reported 5 unrelated patients with FCD type II associated with somatic mutations in the TSC1 (4 patients) or TSC2 (1 patient) genes. None of the patients had clinical findings related to tuberous sclerosis (see TSC1, 191100 and TSC2, 613254). All had intractable seizures and underwent brain resection. Histology in 4 patients showed cortical dyslamination and dysmorphic neurons consistent with FCD type IIa; histology in the fifth patient showed these features as well as balloon cells, consistent with FCD type IIb. Brain imaging showed no abnormal signal intensity in 2 patients, focal cortical dysplasia in 2, and subependymal heterotopia in 1; the last-mentioned patient was the only patient with a TSC2 mutation.
**Smith-Kingsmore syndrome, 616638 (3), AD**
Smith-Kingsmore syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant syndromic intellectual disability syndrome characterized by macrocephaly, seizures, umbilical hernia, and facial dysmorphic features including frontal bossing, midface hypoplasia, small chin, hypertelorism with downslanting palpebral fissures, depressed nasal bridge, smooth philtrum, and thin upper lip (Smith et al., 2013; Baynam et al., 2015).
Smith et al. (2013) described a girl with megalencephaly and intractable seizures. The pregnancy was complicated by maternal hypothyroidism and preeclampsia, and the patient was born at 35 weeks' gestation by cesarian section for breech presentation. She had macrocephaly, poor feeding, hypoglycemia, thrombocytopenia, and hypotonia. Brain imaging showed callosal dysgenesis and mild dilatation of the posterior horns of the lateral ventricles. At age 2 months, she developed apneic seizures and EEG showed high voltage spike and slow wave activity. Treatment with antiepileptic medication was unsuccessful. The patient also had dysmorphic features including large anterior fontanel, frontal bossing, midface hypoplasia, small chin, hypertelorism with downslanting palpebral fissures, depressed nasal bridge, smooth philtrum, and thin upper lip. Other features included narrow thorax, umbilical hernia, rhizomelic limb shortening, and short proximal phalanges. She died of pneumonia at age 19 months.
Baynam et al. (2015) described 3 Aboriginal Australian sibs with intellectual disability, macrocephaly, seizures, umbilical hernia, cafe-au-lait lesions, and craniofacial features including macrostomia, an open mouth posture, hypertelorism, short nose with a depressed nasal bridge, downslanting palpebral fissures, curly or wavy hair, long philtrum, and tall forehead. A cerebral MRI of sib 1 at 2 years 5 months of age showed mild prominence of the ventricular system, hypogenesis of the body and the splenium of the corpus callosum, and generalized white matter loss, particularly in the peritrigonal regions. The mesencephalon, pons, and medulla were small. The cerebellum was normal. A cranial MRI of sib 2 at 2 years 6 months of age showed megalencephaly, perisylvian polymicrogyria, mild prominence of the lateral ventricles, moderate hypogenesis of the corpus callosum, 3 small areas of heterotopic gray matter within the right frontal lobe, and a small left middle cranial fossa arachnoid cyst.
Mroske et al. (2015) reported 2 brothers, aged 6 and 23 years, with SKS. The patients were large for gestational age, had progressive macrocephaly (+5 SD), mildly delayed psychomotor development with intellectual disability and autistic features, and hypotonia. They had mild dysmorphic features, including prominent forehead, deep-set eyes, and strabismus. Both also had iris coloboma and cryptorchidism. Linear growth and weight normalized with age. The older brother had more severe intellectual disability with significant delays in speech and motor skills, whereas the younger brother had more significant asthma and persistent food allergies. Neither had seizures.
Moosa et al. (2017) reported a brother and sister, born of unrelated German parents, with SKS. The patients had progressive macrocephaly from birth (up to +6 SD) and delayed psychomotor development with learning disabilities. Both attended a special-needs school. Dysmorphic features included prominent forehead, frontal bossing, downslanting palpebral fissures, depressed nasal bridge, open mouth, small chin, narrow chest, and short distal phalanges of the hands and feet. The older sister had cystic kidneys, although there was a history of cystic kidneys in the paternal line associated with mutation in the PKD1 gene (601313). She also had multiple polyps in the ileum, cecum, and colon, but it was unclear whether or not the intestinal polyps were related to the disorder.
Clinical Variability
Moller et al. (2016) reported 8 patients, including a mother and daughter and a pair of monozygotic twin sisters, with germline mutations in the MTOR gene and a phenotype consistent with SKS. Seven of the 8 patients had epilepsy, including 6 with focal epilepsy and 1 with generalized epilepsy. The age of seizure onset ranged from 8 months to 10 years. Seizure types were variable, and all patients with seizures showed EEG abnormalities. About half of patients had delayed development, cognitive impairment, intellectual disability, and/or autistic features. Five patients had macrocephaly, and 6 had dysmorphic features, such as frontal bossing, low-set ears, micrognathia, and depressed nasal root. Moller et al. (2016) noted that the phenotypic spectrum associated with germline MTOR variants included milder phenotypes than previously reported; none of the patients had a malformation of cortical development apparent on brain imaging, although some had enlarged ventricles or thin corpus callosum, and at least 3 had near-normal cognitive development. One patient had macrocephaly and intellectual disability without seizures.



MTM1
**Myotubular myopathy, X-linked, 310400 (3), XLR**
Van Wijngaarden et al. (1969) described this disorder in 5 affected males in 4 sibships connected through females who in 2 instances showed partial manifestations on muscle biopsy. The patients were born as floppy infants and had serious respiratory problems early in life; extraocular, facial, and neck muscles were always affected. Meyers et al. (1974) reported affected brothers; both were floppy infants and died at 7 and 18 months of age. The mother showed no abnormality on muscle biopsy or enzyme assay. One of the brothers was previously reported by Engel et al. (1968).
Heckmatt et al. (1985) reported in detail on 8 unrelated children. Facial diplegia and often external ophthalmoplegia were frequent. The newborn cases resemble those of congenital myotonic dystrophy; the distinction can be made by examination of their mother who in the latter situation will invariably show mild facial weakness and clinical or electrical myotonia. Polyhydramnios is a feature of both forms of congenital myopathy, i.e., myotonic dystrophy and X-linked myotubular myopathy. Keppen et al. (1987) noted that there is often a history of polyhydramnios due to decreased fetal swallowing of amniotic fluid.
Moerman et al. (1987) concluded that severe X-linked centronuclear myopathy was responsible for neonatal death from respiratory failure in a case with congenital eventration of the diaphragm which was paper thin and almost transparent. At least 1 other male in the sibship had confirmed X-linked centronuclear myopathy leading to neonatal death. A second patient who died neonatally with congenital eventration of the diaphragm was found by Moerman et al. (1987) to have congenital myotonic dystrophy. In studies through 5 generations of a family, Oldfors et al. (1989) described 8 affected individuals in 4 generations connected through carrier females. Death in the first days of life from asphyxia was common, as was polyhydramnios.
Joseph et al. (1995) reported 10 additional cases distributed in 6 unrelated families. They noted birth length greater than the 90th percentile and large head circumference with or without hydrocephalus in 70% of cases, narrow, elongated face in 80%, and slender, long digits in 60%. There was concordance in the occurrence and severity of hydrocephalus in most sib pairs. The above features in a 'floppy' male infant served as clues for early clinical diagnosis which could then be confirmed by muscle biopsy. Development of polyhydramnios was observed in the third trimester of an at-risk dizygotic twin gestation monitored by serosonography, with confirmation of the diagnosis of myotubular myopathy at birth.
Herman et al. (1999) presented a clinical review of patients with MTM1, using data obtained through medical record review and family interview on 55 male subjects from 49 independent North American families for which a mutation was identified in the MTM1 gene by direct genomic sequencing. Seventy-four percent (26 of 35) over the age of 1 year were living, and 80% remained completely or partially ventilator-dependent. Cognitive development was normal, in the absence of significant hypoxia, and the muscle disorder appeared nonprogressive. Medical complications observed in some long-term survivors included pyloric stenosis, spherocytosis, gallstones, kidney stones or nephrocalcinosis, a vitamin K-responsive bleeding diathesis, and rapid linear growth with advanced bone age. Six patients had biochemical evidence of liver dysfunction, and 2 died after significant liver hemorrhage. The authors suggested that the prognosis for MTM1 may not be as poor as previously reported. They also noted that patients should be carefully monitored for potentially life-threatening medical complications in other (nonmuscle) organ systems.
Pathologic Findings
Askanas et al. (1979) found that muscle cells established from biopsy specimens in 2 patients MTM1 showed an unusual ability to proliferate through numerous passages. Ultrastructurally, the cultured muscle fibers appeared immature even after several weeks. The nuclei were large, the number of ribosomes greatly increased, the myofibrils remained unstriated, and glycogen was accumulated in large lakes. The level of adenylate cyclase in membranes was reduced.
Sarnat et al. (1981) reported the case of an affected infant. At 5 days of age, a muscle biopsy revealed that more than 90% of muscle fibers fulfilled histologic, histochemical, and electron microscopic criteria of fetal myotubules (8 to 15 weeks of gestation). The infant died unexpectedly at 9 months of age of a seemingly unrelated cause, spontaneous rupture of a multifocal cavernous hemangioma of the liver. Postmortem examination revealed that progressive maturation of the fetal muscle had not occurred postnatally, and this maturational arrest was generalized to all striated muscles.
Obligate Female Carriers
Heckmatt et al. (1985) reported mild facial weakness and, on muscle biopsy, increased variability in fiber size in an obligate carrier of the X-linked type. Keppen et al. (1987) found a normal muscle biopsy in a woman who had 2 affected sons by different fathers, indicating that a normal muscle biopsy in the mother cannot exclude X-linked inheritance. Clinical examination of 2 obligatory carriers by Oldfors et al. (1989) showed no muscle weakness, but muscle biopsy showed pathologic changes including greatly increased variability of fiber size and many fibers with central nuclei.
In agreement with recessive inheritance of X-linked myotubular myopathy, heterozygous carriers of MTM1 gene mutations are usually asymptomatic, although mild facial weakness has been reported (Heckmatt et al., 1985; Wallgren-Pettersson et al., 1995). Tanner et al. (1999) reported a 39-year-old Yemenite woman, who was the offspring of first-cousin parents, with a histologic and clinical phenotype consistent with X-linked myotubular myopathy. Gait difficulty was first noted at the age of 5 years. She showed weakness first in the lower and then in the upper extremities and underwent corrective surgery for deformity of the ankles. The patient had a normal intellectual capacity and was still ambulant. She had an elongated face with prognathism. Her speech was dysarthric with a nasal quality. She had marked kyphoscoliosis and bilateral pes equinovarus. There was moderate weakness of her facial muscles and neck flexors and winging of the right scapula. The proximal upper limb muscles and the distal hand muscles were weak and wasted, whereas the forearm muscles showed almost normal strength. In the lower leg, the pattern of weakness was similar with severe pelvic girdle and distal weakness. One of the patient's sisters gave birth to at least 2 boys with established histopathologic features of X-linked myotubular myopathy. The proband was shown to be a carrier of the most common MTM1 gene mutation (300415.0006), which is associated with a severe phenotype in males. The patient was found to have an extremely skewed X-inactivation pattern, thus explaining her abnormal phenotype. The mother, on the other hand, was a nonmanifesting carrier but likewise had an extremely skewed X-inactivation pattern in the opposite direction. The findings indicated a possible inheritance of skewed X inactivation. Linkage analysis excluded involvement of the XIST locus (314670) at Xq13.
Sutton et al. (2001) described a female heterozygous for an R224X mutation of the MTM1 gene (310400.0008) with limb-girdle and facial weakness typical of the cases reported by Tanner et al. (1999) and Hammans et al. (2000). However, in their patient, Sutton et al. (2001) found no skewed X-chromosome inactivation in either lymphocyte or muscle DNA.
Schara et al. (2003) reported a female with prenatal/neonatal onset of clinical symptoms due to myotubular myopathy, who had a heterozygous mutation in the MTM1 gene (300415.0009). During pregnancy, fetal movements were reduced. After birth, she showed severe hypotonia, dyspnea, a weak cry, absent tendon reflexes, a high-arched palate, and a right-sided ptosis. She later had limb-girdle and facial muscle weakness and a waddling gait. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed a wide variation of fiber size and numerous internal nuclei. Schara et al. (2003) noted the more severe clinical course in this female compared to other reported affected females and emphasized the prenatal onset of symptoms.
Grogan et al. (2005) reported 3 sisters with myotubular myopathy confirmed by genetic analysis of the MTM1 gene. All reported unilateral weakness and atrophy of the upper limb since childhood, and the 2 older sisters had onset of gradually progressive generalized weakness in their thirties. X-rays of the hand in 1 patient showed skeletal asymmetry. Two of the sisters had an elevated hemidiaphragm on the ipsilateral side to their upper limb involvement. Five additional asymptomatic female family members carried the same mutation and showed skewed X-inactivation favoring the paternal X chromosome. A fourth unrelated woman with an MTM1 mutation had left facial and left upper and lower limb weakness and atrophy since age 6 years. She developed progressive generalized weakness at age 40 years; x-ray showed elevated left hemidiaphragm. X-inactivation was markedly skewed.



DPYD
**5-fluorouracil toxicity, 274270 (3), AR**
Dihyropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency shows large phenotypic variability, ranging from no symptoms to a convulsive disorder with motor and mental retardation in homozygous patients. In addition, homozygous and heterozygous mutation carriers can develop severe toxicity after the administration of the antineoplastic drug 5-fluorouracil (5FU), which is also catabolized by the DPYD enzyme. This is an example of a pharmacogenetic disorder (Van Kuilenburg et al., 1999).
Since there is no correlation between genotype and phenotype in DPD deficiency, it appears that the deficiency is a necessary, but not sufficient, prerequisite for the development of clinical abnormalities (Van Kuilenburg et al., 1999; Enns et al., 2004).
Berger et al. (1984) presented findings in 3 unrelated patients (2 boys and 1 girl) with a nonspecific clinical picture of cerebral dysfunction and persistent urinary excretion of excessive amounts of uracil, thymine, and 5-hydroxymethyluracil. The excretory pattern suggested deficiency of DPD. The parents of 1 patient were first cousins, suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance.
Wadman et al. (1984) postulated deficiency of DPD as the cause of the thymine-uraciluria they observed in a child with autism.
Brockstedt et al. (1990) commented that 7 of the 8 previously reported pediatric patients were Dutch. They reported a ninth pediatric patient who had developmental retardation, epilepsy, and muscular hypertonia.
Van Gennip et al. (1994) described a Dutch patient with a severe form of DPD deficiency. At age 25 months, the patient had bilateral microphthalmia, coloboma of the iris and choroid, nystagmus, and gradually increasing psychomotor retardation.
Vreken et al. (1997) reported a child with DPD deficiency who showed febrile convulsions, severe neuromotor retardation, and spastic tetraplegia at age 9 months. Cerebral MRI showed ventriculomegaly with white matter hypodensity. At the age of 6 years, thymine-uraciluria was noted and DPD deficiency was demonstrated in fibroblasts. An earlier-born child had died before her first birthday with severe neuromotor retardation and febrile convulsions. Genetic analysis identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the DPYD gene (611779.0005).
Enns et al. (2004) reported a 17-month-old girl, born to consanguineous Pakistani parents, who had a history of failure to thrive, developmental delay, and encephalopathy with prolonged hypoventilation. Other features included microcephaly, strabismus, nystagmus, hypotonia, and mild hepatomegaly. Brain MRI showed prominent sulci and abnormal signals in the cerebral white matter and brainstem. Urinary profile showed increased uracil and thymine consistent with DPD deficiency. She developed seizures at age 22 months, and died at age 31 months of recurrent aspiration pneumonia.
5-Fluorouracil Toxicity
Tuchman et al. (1985) described a 27-year-old woman who had an unusually severe reaction to 5-FU given in limited dosage on a weekly schedule. Symptoms included stomatitis, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, hair loss, diarrhea, fever, marked weight loss, cerebellar ataxia, and neurologic symptoms, progressing to semicoma. High levels of uracil and thymine were found in the urine of the patient and of 1 brother; both had very high plasma and urinary concentrations of pyrimidine bases. Serum levels and urinary excretion of uric acid were normal in all members of the family, and the patient's white cell thymidine kinase (TK; 188300) was normal. The mother's urine showed a small amount of uracil but no thymine. A second brother and a sister showed none of the abnormalities. The authors suggested that the defect may be in dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase, which is involved in pyrimidine base degradation. The defect would not be expected to be apparent clinically unless the subject was given a pyrimidine-base analog.
Diasio et al. (1988) reported a previously healthy 40-year-old woman who suffered severe neurotoxicity due to 5-fluorouracil given for breast cancer. After administration of a 'test' dose of 5-fluorouracil, the patient showed a markedly prolonged elimination half-life (159 min), with no evidence of catabolites of the drug in plasma or cerebrospinal fluid, and 89.7% of the administered dose was excreted into the urine as unchanged drug. Partial deficiency of the enzyme was found also in the patient's father; the mother was deceased. The enzyme was assayed in peripheral blood mononuclear cells.
In an adult patient with asymptomatic DPD deficiency from a family studied by (Sumi et al., 1996), Hayashi et al. (1996) demonstrated metabolic changes predicting a risk of severe 5-fluorouracil toxicity. On restudy of the family of this patient, a sister of the proband was found to excrete large amounts of dihydrouracil and dihydrothymine. The parents and the child of the propositus showed slight increases of dihydrouracil and dihydrothymine. This was the first reported instance of a family with 2 cases of DPD deficiency. A uracil loading test performed on the parents showed increased urinary dihydrouracil concentrations consistent with heterozygosity. Hayashi et al. (1996) noted that individuals with decreased DPYD activity may show increased adverse effects of 5FU treatment.
Of 53 cases of DPD deficiency associated with 5FU-related toxicity reviewed by Milano et al. (1999), 19 cases had moderate or marked DPD deficiency, with less than 70% of the mean population value. More of the cases occurred in women (15 of 19), which was in accord with several previous reports (e.g., Milano et al., 1992). The toxicity score was significantly higher in patients with markedly low DPD activity. Neurotoxicity was the predominant manifestation; cardiotoxicity was observed in only 1 case. None of the reported cases had complete DPD deficiency, even in the 2 patients that died.



DMD
**Becker muscular dystrophy, 300376 (3), XLR**
The muscular dystrophy that carries the Becker eponym is similar to Duchenne muscular dystrophy in the distribution of muscle wasting and weakness, which is mainly proximal, but the course is more benign, with age of onset around 12 years; some patients have no symptoms until much later in life. Loss of ambulation also varies from adolescence onward, with death usually in the fourth or fifth decade. In some cases, as in Duchenne muscular dystrophy, a degree of mental impairment is present (Emery, 2002).
As in DMD, about 5 to 10% of female carriers of this X-linked disorder show muscle weakness, and frequently enlarged calves--so-called manifesting heterozygotes. Such weakness is often asymmetric; it can develop in childhood or not become evident until adult life, and can be slowly progressive or remain static. Because weakness is essentially proximal, differentiation from limb-girdle muscular dystrophy is essential for genetic counseling. In both DMD and BMD, female carriers may develop dilated cardiomyopathy in the absence of apparent weakness (Grain et al., 2001).
Bush and Dubowitz (1991) described fatal rhabdomyolysis complicating general anesthesia in a child with Becker muscular dystrophy. Exertional cramping and probable myoglobinuria was described by Bushby et al. (1991) in a patient with atypical Becker muscular dystrophy (see 300377.0002). Minetti et al. (1993) described 2 unrelated 9-year-old boys with exercise-induced cramps and myoglobinuria associated with elevated serum levels of creatine kinase. DNA analysis of the dystrophin gene was uninformative in 1 patient; in the other, it revealed an in-frame deletion comprising exons 3-6. Gospe et al. (1989) and Doriguzzi et al. (1993) also described exercise intolerance and recurrent myoglobinuria as the only expression of BMD.
Piccolo et al. (1994) described a 32-year-old man in whom cardiac transplantation was performed for end-stage dilated cardiomyopathy and who showed a progressive increase in serum creatine kinase level while receiving cyclosporin and simvastatine immunosuppressive treatment. Revised family history led to a suspicion of X-linked inherited myopathy which was confirmed by muscle biopsy findings. Molecular genetic studies demonstrated a deletion spanning exons 45-47 at the DMD locus.
Fujii et al. (2009) reported what they believed is the first case of true Becker muscular dystrophy in a Japanese girl born of consanguineous parents. She presented at age 14 years with a 7-year history of exercise intolerance with myalgia, swelling of the thigh muscle, and red-brown urine consistent with myoglobinuria. Laboratory studies showed increased serum creatine kinase and myoglobin in the urine, but no cardiac abnormalities. Her clinically unaffected father had mildly increased serum creatine kinase and urinary myoglobin, and her clinically unaffected mother had no symptoms. Skeletal muscle biopsy of the proband showed mild dystrophic changes and faint staining for dystrophin, consistent with Becker muscular dystrophy. Molecular genetic analysis identified a homozygous deletion of exons 45 to 55 of the DMD gene, predicting an in-frame deletion of 593 residues. Each parent was heterozygous for the deletion. There was a remote family history of cardiac disease in several males.
**Cardiomyopathy, dilated, 3B, 302045 (3), X-linked**
Berko and Swift (1987) described a black family in which 11 young male members had definite or possible evidence of dilated cardiomyopathy. The 5 affected males for whom they had complete clinical data survived for 5 to 12 months after the onset of symptoms, which occurred between ages 15 and 21 years. A diagnosis of definite late-onset dilated cardiomyopathy was given in 3 mothers of affected males and possible diagnosis was given in 2 others. These women presented in their forties with atypical chest pain, and progressive congestive heart failure developed gradually over a period of 10 or more years. Berko and Swift (1987) suggested that the affected males were hemizygous and the affected females heterozygous for a gene for idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. They pointed to a similar pedigree pattern in the families reported by Evans (1949), Biorck and Orinius (1964), Csanady and Szasz (1976), and Ross et al. (1978).
Using antidystrophin antibody prepared to the N-terminal portion of dystrophin, Towbin et al. (1991) found low abundance cardiac dystrophin but normal skeletal muscle dystrophin in patients with XLCM.
**Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 310200 (3), XLR**
Dystrophin-associated muscular dystrophies range from the severe Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) to the milder Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD; 300376). Mapping and molecular genetic studies indicate that both are the result of mutations in the huge gene that encodes dystrophin, also symbolized DMD. Approximately two-thirds of the mutations in both forms are deletions of one or many exons in the dystrophin gene. Although there is no clear correlation found between the extent of the deletion and the severity of the disorder, DMD deletions usually result in frameshift. Boland et al. (1996) studied a retrospective cohort of 33 male patients born between 1953 and 1983. The mean age at DMD diagnosis was 4.6 years; wheelchair dependency had a median age of 10 years; cardiac muscle failure developed in 15% of patients with a median age of 21.5 years; smooth muscle dysfunction in the digestive or urinary tract occurred in 21% and 6% of the patients, respectively, at a median age of 15 years. In this cohort, death occurred at a median age of 17 years. The authors commented that the diagnosis of DMD is being made at an earlier age but survival has not changed.
Skeletal Muscle
The most distinctive feature of Duchenne muscular dystrophy is a progressive proximal muscular dystrophy with characteristic pseudohypertrophy of the calves. The bulbar (extraocular) muscles are spared but the myocardium is affected. There is massive elevation of creatine kinase levels in the blood, myopathic changes by electromyography, and myofiber degeneration with fibrosis and fatty infiltration on muscle biopsy.The onset of Duchenne muscular dystrophy usually occurs before age 3 years, and the victim is chairridden by age 12 and dead by age 20. The onset of Becker muscular dystrophy is often in the 20s and 30s and survival to a relatively advanced age is frequent.
Moser and Emery (1974) found that some female heterozygotes had myopathy resembling autosomal recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (253600). Serum creatine kinase was particularly elevated in these patients. In most populations, the frequency of manifesting heterozygotes is about the same as that of females with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy.
Soloway and Mudge (1979) remarked that patients with advanced muscular dystrophy may develop hypokalemia from insults (vomiting, diarrhea, diuretics) that would have little effect on normal persons. Reduced intracellular potassium stores are responsible for this perilous situation, which may be the mechanism of death.
In an Italian boy with congenital myopathy, born to nonconsanguineous parents, Prelle et al. (1992) found absence of dystrophin in the patient's muscle by immunohistochemical methods and a deletion of the 5-prime end of the dystrophin gene. Although the patient showed severe mental retardation, there was no cerebral atrophy. Cardiomyopathy was also present.
Frigeri et al. (1998) analyzed AQP4 expression in the skeletal muscle of mdx mice; immunofluorescence experiments showed a marked reduction of aquaporin-4 (AQP4; 600308) expression, suggesting a critical role in the membrane alteration of DMD.
Wakayama et al. (2002) analyzed skeletal muscle samples from 6 patients with DMD and found markedly reduced AQP4 expression by immunohistochemical staining and markedly decreased levels of AQP4 mRNA as measured by RT-PCR, compared to controls. Genomic analysis of the AQP4 gene revealed no abnormalities. The authors concluded that the reduced mRNA was due to either decreased transcription or increased degradation of the message.
Noguchi et al. (2003) performed cDNA microarray analysis on skeletal muscle biopsy specimens from 6 patients with DMD. There was increased expression of genes related to immune response, sarcomere, extracellular matrix proteins, and signaling or cell growth. Upregulation of these genes reflected dystrophic changes, myofiber necrosis, inflammation, and muscle regeneration. Genes related to muscle homeostasis and energy metabolism were downregulated.
Cardiac Muscle
Myocardial involvement appeared in a high percentage of DMD patients by about 6 years of age; it was present in 95% of cases by the last years of life. Severe cardiomyopathy did not develop before age 21 in BMD and few patients showed any cardiac signs before age 13 (Nigro et al., 1983).
Mirabella et al. (1993) noted that electrocardiographic abnormalities had been reported in 6.6 to 16.4% of DMD heterozygous females and that in one carrier female severe cardiomyopathy had been described in association with muscle weakness. They reported 2 carriers with dilated cardiomyopathy and increased serum CK but no symptoms of muscle weakness. Heart biopsies in both patients showed absence of dystrophin in many muscle fibers.
Smooth Muscle
Noting that in DMD functional impairment of smooth muscle in the gastrointestinal tract can cause acute gastric dilatation and intestinal pseudoobstruction that may be fatal, Barohn et al. (1988) studied gastric emptying in 11 patients with DMD. Strikingly delayed gastric emptying times were observed.
Enigmatically, the extraocular muscles (EOMs) remain clinically unaffected during the course of Duchenne muscular dystrophy (Kaminski et al., 1992). Khurana et al. (1995) showed that dystrophin deficiency does not result in myonecrosis or pathologically elevated levels of intracellular calcium in the EOMs. They reported in vitro experiments demonstrating that extraocular muscles are inherently more resistant to necrosis caused by pharmacologically elevated intracellular calcium levels when compared with pectoral musculature. They suggested that the EOMs are spared in DMD because of their intrinsic ability to maintain calcium homeostasis better than other striated muscle groups. This suggested further that modulating levels of intracellular calcium in muscle may be of potential therapeutic use in DMD.
Nervous System
Mental retardation of mild degree is a pleiotropic effect of the Duchenne gene (Zellweger and Niedermeyer, 1965). As indicated later, the finding of dystrophin mRNA in brain may bear a relationship to the mental retardation in DMD patients. Emery et al. (1979) sought heterogeneity in DMD as one explanation for the high birth incidence. Affected boys were categorized according to whether they had severe mental handicap or not. Those with severe mental defect had later age of onset and confinement to wheelchair, less marked fall in creatine kinase with age, and a greater urinary excretion of certain amino acids. In 50 DMD patients with a mean age of 11.1 years (range 3.5 to 20.3), Bresolin et al. (1994) found that 31% had a Wechsler full intelligence quotient (FIQ) lower than 75 and that only 24% had appropriate IQ levels by this index.
Bushby et al. (1995) examined the hypothesis that the nature of the dystrophin mutation may influence the development of mental retardation. Previously, it had been shown that deletions removing the brain-specific promoter were compatible with normal intelligence. Bushby et al. (1995) studied 74 boys with DMD, 18% of which had a full scale IQ of below 70. The authors found no significant IQ difference between the patients with promoter deletions and those without, nor did they find a relationship between the length of the deletion and full scale IQ. They found, however, that boys with distal deletions were more likely to be mentally retarded than were those with proximal deletions.
Retinal Function
Abnormal retinal neurotransmission as measured by electroretinography (ERG) was observed in boys with DMD by Cibis et al. (1993) and Pillers et al. (1993). Electroretinography is a recording of summed electrical signal produced by the retina when stimulated with a flash of light. The dark-adapted ERGs, recorded under scotopic testing conditions, have shown normal a-waves (a response of negative polarity generated by the photoreceptors) but reduced amplitude rod-isolated b-waves (a response of positive polarity originating primarily from the ON-bipolar cells) in DMD patients. This type of ERG abnormality with profound b-wave suppression is commonly associated with night blindness; however, there have been no reports of night blindness or any other visual abnormality in boys with DMD, and dark-adaptometry studies have been normal. Fitzgerald et al. (1994) used long-duration stimuli to separate ON (depolarizing bipolar cell) and OFF (hyperpolarizing bipolar cell) contributions to the cone-dominated ERG to understand better how the retina functions in boys with DMD. In the ERGs of 11 DMD boys, they found abnormal signal transmission at the level of the photoreceptor and ON-bipolar cell in both the rod and cone generated responses. Jensen et al. (1995) examined 16 boys with DMD/BMD of whom 10 had negative ERGs. Eight of the boys had DMD gene deletions downstream from exon 44. Normal dark adaptation thresholds were observed in all patients and there were no anomalous visual functions. Hence, negative ERG in DMD/BMD is not associated with eye disease. Normal ERGs were found in 6 boys with DMD/BMD. Jensen et al. (1995) speculated that a retinal or glial dystrophin may be truncated or absent in the boys with negative ERGs.
The ophthalmic features of DMD include normal ERG a-wave with reduced b-wave, normal visual acuity, and normal retinal morphology. Immunocytochemistry revealed strong AQP4 water channel expression in Muller cells in mouse retina and in fibrous astrocytes in optic nerve. Li et al. (2002) compared ERGs and retinal morphology in wildtype mice and transgenic knockout mice with no Aqp4. Significantly reduced ERG b-wave potentials were recorded in 10-month-old null mice with smaller changes in 1-month-old mice. Morphologic analysis of retina by light and electron microscopy showed no differences in retinal ultrastructure. That retinal function was mildly impaired in Aqp4-null mice suggested a role for Aqp4 in Muller cell fluid balance. The authors suggested that AQP4 expression in supportive cells in the nervous system facilitated neural signal transduction in nearby electrically excitable cells.
Costa et al. (2007) evaluated color vision in 44 patients with Duchenne muscular dystrophy using 4 different color tests. Patients were divided into 2 groups according to the region of deletion in the dystrophin gene: 12 patients had deletion upstream of exon 30, and 32 downstream of exon 30. Of the patients with DMD, 47% (21/44) had a red-green color vision defect. Of the patients with deletion downstream of exon 30, 66% had a red-green color defect. No color defect was found in the patients with a deletion upstream of exon 30. A negative correlation between the color thresholds and age was found for the controls and patients with DMD, suggesting a nonprogressive color defect. The percentage (66%) of patients with red-green defect was significantly higher than the expected value (less than 10%) for the normal male population (P less than 0.001). Costa et al. (2007) suggested that the findings might be partially explained by a retinal impairment related to dystrophin isoform Dp260.
Carrier Females
In a 9-year follow-up of study of 99 Dutch female carriers of DMD or BMD mutations, Schade van Westrum et al. (2011) found that 11 carriers (10%) (10 DMD and 1 BMD) fulfilled the criteria for dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM). Nine of the patients had developed DCM during the follow-up period. These carriers were on average older, were more symptomatic, and more often had hypertension, exertional dyspnea, and chest pain compared to mutation carriers without DCM. The findings suggested that female carriers of a mutation can develop progressive cardiac abnormalities and should undergo routine cardiac evaluation, preferably by echocardiology.
Mercier et al. (2013) reviewed the features of 26 female carriers of pathogenic mutations in the DMD gene who were referred for symptoms related to the disorder before 17 years of age. Five had a Duchenne-like phenotype with loss of ambulation before age 15 years, 13 had a Becker-like phenotype with muscle weakness but persistence of ambulation after age 15 years, and 8 had exercise intolerance. Initial symptoms included significant muscle weakness (88%), mostly affecting the lower limbs, or exercise intolerance (27%). Cardiac dysfunction was present in 19%, and cognitive impairment in 27%. Cognitive impairment was associated with mutations in the distal part of the gene. Muscle biopsy showed dystrophic changes in 83% and mosaic immunostaining for dystrophin in 81%. The X-chromosome inactivation pattern was biased in 62% of cases. Mercier et al. (2013) concluded that carrier females may have significant symptoms of the disorder.



FANCL
**Fanconi anemia, complementation group L, 614083 (3), AR**
Fanconi anemia (FA) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder that causes genomic instability. Characteristic clinical features include developmental abnormalities in major organ systems, early-onset bone marrow failure, and a high predisposition to cancer. The cellular hallmark of FA is hypersensitivity to DNA crosslinking agents and high frequency of chromosomal aberrations pointing to a defect in DNA repair (summary by Deakyne and Mazin, 2011).
For additional general information and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of Fanconi anemia, see 227650.
Meetei et al. (2003) detected little or no PHF9 protein in a cell line (EURA868) from an individual with Fanconi anemia of unassigned complementation group (subsequently designated FANCL). The phenotype of the cells from EURA868 resembled that of other Fanconi anemia cells, including the absence of monoubiquitinated FANCD2 (613984) and hypersensitivity to mitomycin C. These Fanconi anemia defects were corrected by ectopic expression of PHF9.
Ali et al. (2009) reported a male patient with FANCL who had developmental delay, a cafe-au-lait spot, mild hypocellularity, and a family history of leukemia.
Vetro et al. (2015) reported 2 unrelated infants with a severe form of FANCL presenting as multiple congenital anomalies reminiscent of VACTERL (192350) or VACTERL-H (276950). The first patient (case 1b), born of consanguineous Moroccan parents, was noted to have radial hypoplasia and intrauterine growth retardation on prenatal ultrasound at 14 weeks' gestation. Later investigations showed tetralogy of Fallot, left kidney agenesis, right kidney hydronephrosis, and esophageal atresia. After birth, the patient showed hypertelorism, broad nasal root and puffy cheeks, and bilateral absence of the thumbs. The infant died 2 months later and the abnormalities were confirmed by postmortem examination. Family history included 2 previous fetuses with congenital malformations; data available for 1 in which the pregnancy had been terminated revealed similar features. In the second family, a female Dutch infant (case 2) showed intrauterine growth retardation, hydrocephalus, facial dysmorphism with depressed nasal tip, microtia, microphthalmia, cleft palate, short neck, short forearms, radial club hands with absent thumbs, hypoplastic sacrum, and anal atresia with rectovaginal fistula. She also had cardiac defects and renal hypoplasia. She died at age 2 days. Cells derived from both patients showed increased chromosomal breakage with DEB or MMC, consistent with a diagnosis of Fanconi anemia.



LHX4
**Pituitary hormone deficiency, combined, 4, 262700 (3), AD**
Machinis et al. (2001) reported a French family in which 2 sibs, born of a consanguineous marriage, were found to have combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) involving growth hormone (GH; 139250), thyrotropin (TSH; 188540) and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH; 202200). MRI imaging showed that both had small sella turcicas, persistent craniopharyngeal canals, hypoplastic anterior hypophyses with associated pointed cerebellar tonsils (Chiari malformation; 118420), and ectopic posterior hypophyses. Their mother was 148 cm tall and had a small sella turcica and a hypoplastic anterior hypophysis associated with a deformation of the cerebellar tonsils. Their maternal grandfather was 150 cm tall and had a small sella turcica.
Tajima et al. (2007) described a 16-month-old Japanese girl who presented with severe respiratory distress and hypoglycemia at birth; subsequent evaluation revealed CPHD, with deficiency of TSH, ACTH, GH, prolactin (PRL; 176760), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH; 136530), and luteinizing hormone (LH; 152780). At age 15 months, she had short stature (-5.6 SD for a normal Japanese girl), and brain MRI demonstrated hypoplastic anterior pituitary, ectopic posterior lobe, a poorly developed sella turcica, and Chiari malformation.
Pfaeffle et al. (2008) identified 5 patients with CPHD and pituitary dysmorphology. The patients had GH deficiency and reduction in TSH, LH, FSH, or ACTH. One patient had hypoglycemia, and 2 had delayed bone age. In contrast to previously reported patients with LHX4 mutations, no cerebellar hypoplasia reminiscent of Arnold-Chiari malformation was seen.



FUT8
**Congenital disorder of glycosylation with defective fucosylation 1, 618005 (3), AR**
Congenital disorder of glycosylation with defective fucosylation is an autosomal recessive multisystem disorder apparent from birth. Affected infants have poor growth, failure to thrive, hypotonia, skeletal anomalies, and delayed psychomotor development with intellectual disability. Additional highly variable congenital defects may be observed (summary by Ng et al., 2018).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation with Defective Fucosylation
See also CDGF2 (618323), caused by mutation in the FCSK gene (608675) on chromosome 16q22.
For an overview of congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG), see CDG1A (212065) and CDG2A (212066).
Ng et al. (2018) reported 3 unrelated children with a complex multisystem disorder apparent from birth. Two of the pregnancies were complicated by polyhydramnios, and all infants showed intrauterine growth retardation with microcephaly. The neonatal period was characterized by feeding difficulties, requiring G-tube placement in 2 patients, failure to thrive, hypotonia, and respiratory problems. All had short stature with short limbs, and 1 also had contractures, osteopenia, dislocated hips, and kyphoscoliosis. The patients had severe global developmental delay, intellectual disability, and seizures. All had variable dysmorphic features, such as broad forehead, bitemporal narrowing, buphthalmos, broad nasal bridge, high palate, short nose, retrognathia, and hirsutism, but there was no consistent appearance. Additional features were highly variable: 1 patient had a 2-vessel cord, hypothyroidism, an atrial septal defect, nephrocalcinosis, and congenital neutropenia, and another had hypoglycemia, congenital glaucoma, and onset of seizures in the neonatal period. One patient died at age 7 years; this patient had a similarly affected deceased older sib.



SYT14
**?Spinocerebellar ataxia, autosomal recessive 11, 614229 (3), AR**
Doi et al. (2011) reported 2 Japanese brothers, born of consanguineous parents, with spinocerebellar ataxia associated with psychomotor retardation. One patient had mild psychomotor retardation since childhood, graduated from a normal junior high school, and held a job for several years, whereas the other had more severe psychomotor retardation, went to a school for the disabled, and later lived in an assisted facility. Both developed a progressive gait disorder in their fifties, followed by dysarthria, limb ataxia, truncal ataxia, and disturbance of smooth eye movements. One had nystagmus. Neither had involuntary movements. Brain MRI showed mild atrophy of the cerebellar vermis and hemispheres.



STAT3
**Autoimmune disease, multisystem, infantile-onset, 1, 615952 (3), AD**
Infantile-onset multisystem autoimmune disease-1 is characterized by early childhood onset of a spectrum of autoimmune disorders affecting multiple organs. Common manifestations include insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and autoimmune enteropathy, or celiac disease, and autoimmune hematologic disorders. Other features include short stature and nonspecific dermatitis. More variable features include hypothyroidism, autoimmune arthritis, and delayed puberty. Some patients may show recurrent infections. The disorder results from an inborn error of cytokine signaling (summary by Flanagan et al., 2014 and Milner et al., 2015).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Infantile-Onset Multisystem Autoimmune Disease
See also ADMIO2 (617006), caused by mutation in the ZAP70 gene (176947) on chromosome 2q12.
Flanagan et al. (2014) reported 5 unrelated patients with early-onset autoimmune disease. Three patients were diagnosed with type 1 insulin-dependent diabetes in the first weeks of life, and a fourth was diagnosed with diabetes at 43 weeks of age. Autoimmune enteropathy or celiac disease presented in the first 2 years of life in 3 patients. Additional autoimmune disorders diagnosed during childhood included autoimmune interstitial lung disease, juvenile-onset arthritis, and primary hypothyroidism. Other common features included short stature, eczema, delayed puberty, and dental abnormalities. Two patients had evidence of immunodeficiency with recurrent respiratory infections, and 1 patient developed large granular lymphocytic T-cell leukemia. Laboratory studies of 2 patients showed decreased numbers of regulatory T cells, and 1 patient had evidence of increased cytokine production.
Haapaniemi et al. (2015) reported further details of 2 of the patients reported by Flanagan et al. (2014) and presented a third patient with the disorder. All had recurrent infections and autoimmune features, 1 had lymphadenopathy, and 1 developed T-cell leukemia. The third patient was a 22-year-old woman with late-onset ADMIO. She had recurrent ear infections in childhood, but normal response to vaccination, including BCG. In her late teens, she presented with lymphocytic colitis, autoimmune thrombocytopenia, hypogammaglobulinemia, joint pain, eczema, and Mycobacterium avium pneumonia. Detailed laboratory studies of these patients showed increased numbers of double-negative (CD4-, CD8-) T cells, decreased dendritic, T regulatory, NK, and Th17 cells, as well as hypogammaglobulinemia associated with decreased switched memory B cells. Two patients had decreased numbers of circulating eosinophils. The findings indicated that the disorder can affect multiple immune cell lineages.
Milner et al. (2015) reported 13 patients from 10 families with childhood-onset of various autoimmune disorders associated with lymphoproliferation. The age at onset ranged from infancy to 15 years, but most presented before age 5. There was a high prevalence of autoimmune hematologic disorders, including hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia. Two developed insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and 5 had autoimmune enteropathy. Several had various other manifestations, such as scleroderma, arthritis, atopic dermatitis, and inflammatory lung disease. Almost all had lymphadenopathy, often with hepatosplenomegaly. Several patients had short stature and poor overall growth. Many patients also had recurrent infections, including 4 with fungal infections, and some of these patients showed hypogammaglobulinemia. Results of immunologic work-ups were variable, but showed moderate T-cell lymphopenia, hypogammaglobulinemia, and increased double-negative (CD4-, CD8-) T cells. Two families showed evidence of incomplete penetrance. All patients required significant immunosuppression to control their diseases, and 2 patients underwent hematopoietic stem cell transplant. One patient who was treated with pharmacologic IL6 blockade demonstrated a dramatic improvement in his arthritis.
**Hyper-IgE recurrent infection syndrome, 147060 (3), AD**
Hyper-IgE recurrent infection syndrome is a primary immunodeficiency disorder characterized by chronic eczema, recurrent Staphylococcal infections, increased serum IgE, and eosinophilia. Other more variable immunologic abnormalities include defective granulocyte chemotaxis, abnormalities in T-lymphocyte subgroups, impaired antibody production, and decreased production of or response to certain cytokines. Importantly, the same immune system defects are not found in all patients. Some patients may have a distinctive coarse facial appearance, abnormal dentition, hyperextensibility of the joints, and bone fractures (Buckley et al., 1972; Grimbacher et al., 1999).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Hyper-IgE Recurrent Infection Syndrome
See also HIES2 (243700), caused by mutation in the DOCK8 gene (611432), HIES3 (618282), caused by mutation in the ZNF341 gene (618269), HIES4 (618523), caused by mutation in the IL6ST gene (600694), and HIES5 (618944), caused by mutation in the IL6R gene (147880).
Davis et al. (1966) reported 2 unrelated girls with lifelong histories of indolent Staphylococcal abscesses. Both had eczema soon after birth and had persistent weeping lesions on the ears and face. The abscesses were characterized as 'cold' because of the lack of surrounding warmth, erythema, or tenderness. Both girls had red hair and were fair-skinned. The authors suggested a defect in local resistance to Staphylococcal infection. Further study of these girls by White et al. (1969) revealed normal leukocyte functions. However, Hill et al. (1974) and Hill and Quie (1974) found a defect in neutrophil granulocyte chemotaxis and very high serum IgE levels in 4 girls with the disorder; 2 of the girls had been reported by Davis et al. (1966).
Renner et al. (2007) provided a follow-up of 1 of the patients reported by Davis et al. (1966). At 50 years of age, the woman had had lifelong eczema, multiple atraumatic fractures, hyperkeratotic fingernails due to candida infection, recurrent Staphylococcal abscesses, and pneumonia with lung abscesses and pneumatocele formation. Two of her 3 sons and 1 grandson were also affected.
Buckley et al. (1972) described 2 male patients with features of Job syndrome as originally described by Davis et al. (1966). Each boy had extremely high serum IgE levels as well as immediate cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions to Staphylococcus aureus and Candida albicans. The authors also noted joint hyperextensibility and asymmetric facies.
Van Scoy et al. (1975) described a 20-year-old woman and her daughter who had recurrent bacterial infections and chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. Laboratory studies showed marked elevation of serum IgE, defective neutrophil chemotaxis, and impaired lymphocyte response to candida antigen. The mother's brother, father, and paternal grandfather showed mild increases in IgE and mildly depressed chemotactic activity of neutrophils.
Jacobs and Norman (1977) found a cellular chemotactic defect in the neutrophils of both parents and 3 of 4 their children who suffered from unusually severe bacterial eczema, asthma, and recurrent bacterial skin infections, all starting in the first month of life. The parents were less severely affected. Those with severe eczema had increased IgE. All affected members had HLA-B12; the unaffected child did not. The 2 most severely affected children were homozygous for HLA-B12.
Osteoporosis and a propensity to bone fracture, referred to by Brestel et al. (1982) as 'osteogenesis imperfecta tarda,' was a recognized feature of hyper-IgE syndrome. Kirchner et al. (1985) also noted the association of hyper-IgE syndrome with osteoporosis and recurrent fractures. Hoger et al. (1985) described the association with craniosynostosis and discussed 3 reported cases.
Robinson et al. (1982) described a kindred brought to attention because of a 6-year-old girl who showed features of both the hyper-IgE syndrome and chronic granulomatous disease. Inheritance was possibly autosomal dominant. Laboratory studies showed impaired T cell responses.
Donabedian and Gallin (1982) presented evidence suggesting that mononuclear cells from patients with the hyper-IgE recurrent infection syndrome produced an inhibitor of leukocyte chemotaxis.
Donabedian and Gallin (1983) provided a review of 13 patients with hyper-IgE syndrome examined at the National Institutes of Health. Nine of the 13 had coarse facies, with broad nasal bridge, prominent nose, and irregularly proportioned cheeks and jaws. All had recurrent skin infections, most by 3 months of age. All patients, except 1, had recurrent pneumonias, and most had recurrent bronchitis and otitis. Many patients developed pneumatoceles and most required chest tube drainage and/or lobectomies. Seven of the 13 had Candidal infections of the nails, vagina, or mouth. Three additional patients were described as having a 'variant' of the disorder due to lack of cold abscesses and serious sinopulmonary infection, declining serum IgE levels, and first appearance of infection at age 17 years, respectively. Laboratory studies showed mild to moderate eosinophilia. Impaired neutrophil chemotaxis was not a constant feature, and it was not severe when it occurred. There was some evidence for a chemotactic inhibitor.
In patients with hyper-IgE syndrome, Dreskin et al. (1985) demonstrated deficiency of serum anti-Staph aureus IgA, salivary IgA, and salivary anti-Staph aureus IgA. There was an inverse correlation between the number of infections at mucosal surfaces and in adjacent lymph nodes and the levels of these substances as well as of total serum IgE and total serum IgD.
Lui and Inculet (1990) described a patient with presumed Job syndrome and recurrent lung abscess necessitating lung resection. Serum IgE levels were markedly elevated. Some of the lung abscesses appeared to be due to Staph aureus; the resected right lower lobe showed an abscess cavity with aspergilloma.
Borges et al. (1998) evaluated the facial features of 9 patients from 7 kindreds with Job syndrome. Consistent features included prominent forehead with deep-set eyes, increased width of the nose, a full lower lip, and thickening of the nose and ears. The mean alar width and outer canthal distance were significantly increased. The authors concluded that there is a recognizable face of Job syndrome.
The study of Grimbacher et al. (1999) established that the hyper-IgE syndrome is a multisystem disorder. Grimbacher et al. (1999) studied 30 patients with hyper-IgE syndrome and 70 of their relatives. In addition to the recurrent skin and pulmonary abscesses and extremely elevated levels of IgE in serum, there are associated facial, dental, and skeletal features. Nonimmunologic features of the hyper-IgE syndrome were present in all patients older than 8 years. Failure or delay of shedding of the primary teeth owing to lack of root resorption was observed in 72%. Common findings among patients were recurrent fractures (57%), hyperextensible joints (68%), and scoliosis (in 76% of patients over 16 years of age). The classic triad of abscesses, pneumonia, and an elevated IgE level was identified in 77% of all patients and in 85% of those older than 8 years. In 6 (26%) of 23 adults, IgE levels declined over time and came closer to or fell within the normal range.
Grimbacher et al. (1999) noted the unusual facial phenotype of the hyper-IgE syndrome, which had been commented on by Davis et al. (1966) and by Borges et al. (1998). By the age of 16 years, all of the patients studied by Grimbacher et al. (1999) showed distinctive facial characteristics, including facial asymmetry with a suggestion of hemihypertrophy, prominent forehead, deep-set eyes, broad nasal bridge, wide, fleshy nasal tip, and mild prognathism. The facial skin was rough, with prominent pores. The interalar distance was increased. Head circumference also tended to be larger than normal.
Crosby et al. (2012) reported a 35-year-old African-American male who presented with dysphagia that was resistant to proton pump inhibitors. The patient had a normal blood cell count and differential with 12% eosinophils and total IgE of 2728 kU/L. Additional complaints included constipation with soy and hives after eating fish. The patient had a history of recurrent infections, including staphylococcal pneumonia, as well as skin abscesses, fractures, and esophageal candidiasis. He had undergone left lung pneumonectomy secondary to pneumatocele formation after severe pneumonia. The patient had coarse facies, broad nasal bridge, moderate eczema, and hyperextensibility, and his HIES score was 53. He was found to have a ringed esophagus. Histopathologic analysis of the middle third of the esophagus revealed elevated eosinophil numbers.



A2ML1
**{Otitis media, susceptibility to}, 166760 (3), AD**



TBX20
**Atrial septal defect 4, 611363 (3)**
Kirk et al. (2007) identified 2 families with congenital heart defects, in which affected individuals displayed a complex spectrum of cardiac developmental abnormalities, including defects in septation, chamber growth, and valvulogenesis, and heterozygous mutation in the TBX20 gene. The proband of the first family had ASD, which was corrected surgically in early childhood. Her grandmother had a small ventriculoseptal defect (VSD), and her mother had a large patent foramen ovale (PFO) with a permanent left-to-right blood shunt. Cardiac valves and left ventricular function were normal in all individuals. The proband of the second family had a small ASD and mild coarctation of the aorta. At age 31 years he underwent percutaneous device closure of the ASD. He also had mild to moderate pulmonary hypertension diagnosed on cardiac catheterization at age 7 months and 6 years, although this resolved. Reduced left ventricular function was also identified by echocardiography and cardiac catheterization in childhood, and this persisted into adulthood; at age 32 years, echocardiogram demonstrated a mildly dilated left ventricle with mild global impairment of systolic function. The mother of the proband had marked mitral valve prolapse with mild regurgitation, dilated cardiomyopathy, and apicolateral hypertrophy. A half sister of the mother was scheduled for repair of a septal defect when she died in a vehicle accident during her 20s. An older sister of the proband died at age 11 months because of congenital mitral valve stenosis associated with a small left ventricle and endocardial fibroelastosis. Another sister died at age 7 years of right heart failure due to severe primary pulmonary hypertension. A man from the earliest of 3 generations in this family, deceased at the time of report, had mitral valve disease.



LGI1
**Epilepsy, familial temporal lobe, 1, 600512 (3), AD**
Autosomal dominant lateral temporal lobe epilepsy is a specific form of temporal lobe epilepsy characterized by partial seizures originating from the temporal lobe. Seizures are usually accompanied by sensory symptoms, most often auditory in nature (summary by Winawer et al., 2000).
Genetic Heterogeneity of Temporal Lobe Epilepsy
See also ETL2 (608096), which maps to chromosome 12q; ETL3 (611630), which maps to chromosome 4q; ETL4 (611631), which maps to chromosome 9q; ETL5 (614417), caused by mutation in the CPA6 gene (609562) on chromosome 8q13; ETL6 (615697), which maps to chromosome 3q25-q26; ETL7 (616436), caused by mutation in the RELN gene (600514) on chromosome 7q22; and ETL8 (616461), caused by mutation in the GAL gene (137035) on chromosome 11q13.
Most partial or focal epilepsies in which seizures begin in a specific brain region are assumed to be nongenetic. However, relatives of probands with partial epilepsy have an increased risk of epilepsy compared with the general population, suggesting a genetic influence on at least some partial epilepsies (Ottman et al., 1995).
Ottman et al. (1995) studied a family in which 11 individuals in 3 generations had partial epilepsy classified as idiopathic/cryptogenic. Epilepsy was clearly localization-related in all but 1 of the individuals; the remaining person had only nocturnal seizures and thus could not be classified. In 6 of those with idiopathic/cryptogenic epilepsy and in 1 with remote symptomatic epilepsy, nonspecific auditory disturbances (such as a ringing noise that grew louder or a humming like a machine) were reported as a simple partial component of their seizures. None of the interictal EEGs showed an epileptiform abnormality. The age at onset of epilepsy ranged from 8 to 19 years. All family members had normal intelligence. Seizures occurred infrequently; 7 of the 11 had been free of seizures for 3 years or more before interview. Phenytoin was the primary anti-seizure medication prescribed in 10 of the 11 subjects; the remaining subject received carbamazapine. Ottman et al. (1995) noted that the auditory features suggested a neocortical (or lateral) temporal lobe origin.
Winawer et al. (2000) described the family reported by Ottman et al. (1995) in further detail. Partial seizures were characterized most frequently by sensory symptoms (73% of subjects), including a high frequency of auditory symptoms (55% of subjects), followed in frequency by cephalic, visual, olfactory, and vertiginous symptoms. Somatosensory auras were not reported. Autonomic symptoms (visceral/epigastric and cardiac palpitations) occurred in 45% of patients. Occasional psychic/emotional symptoms were reported (e.g., fear, deja vu, panic, depersonalization). The auditory symptoms ranged from unformed sounds, such as humming and ringing, to distortions and volume changes. Some reported formed sounds, singing and voices, and one subject's description suggested seizures provoked by auditory stimuli. Winawer et al. (2000) emphasized that the features suggested a lateral temporal lobe onset zone.
Brodtkorb et al. (2002) reported a large Norwegian family in which 20 members over 5 generations had seizures in an autosomal dominant pattern. Twelve affected members were studied: mean age of onset was 18 years (range 4-42); 11 had simple partial seizures, 8 of which were characterized by aphasic features, and many experienced auditory hallucinations; all had secondary generalized tonic-clonic seizures that improved with age. EEG recordings in 4 patients showed temporal lobe activity and the symptoms suggested localization to the lateral neocortical temporal lobe. Two patients died unexpectedly in their twenties.
In 3 of 10 families with autosomal dominant partial epilepsy with auditory features, Ottman et al. (2004) identified different mutations in the LGI1 gene that cosegregated with the disease phenotype. Including data from an earlier report (Kalachikov et al., 2002), Ottman et al. (2004) estimated a disease penetrance of 54% (35 to 73%) and noted that LGI1 mutations had been identified in approximately 50% of families tested, suggesting genetic heterogeneity. There were no specific clinical features unique to those patients with LGI1 mutations, but autonomic symptoms were less common and auditory symptoms more common in those with LGI1 mutations. The most common auditory symptoms were simple, unformed sounds, such as buzzing and ringing. A subset of patients with mutations also had idiopathic generalized epilepsy.
In affected members of 2 of 4 families with ADPEAF, Berkovic et al. (2004) identified heterozygous mutations in the LGI1 gene. One of the families was of Ashkenazi Jewish descent and the other, previously reported by Berkovic et al. (1996), was Australian of British descent. Age at onset ranged from 8 to 50 years (mean, 19.2 years), and auditory auras occurred in 10 of 14 affected individuals. Five individuals had visual symptoms and 7 had secondarily generalized seizures.
Michelucci et al. (2007) reported a 36-year-old woman with lateral temporal lobe epilepsy manifest as telephone-induced seizures. She had an 11-year history of recurrent partial complex and secondarily generalized seizures evoked almost exclusively by answering the telephone. Other auditory stimuli could also elicit seizures. The seizures were accompanied by distortion or attenuation of sound, inability to understand language, and inability to speak appropriately, all consistent with lateral temporal lobe involvement. Genetic analysis identified a de novo mutation in the LGI1 gene (604619.0010).
Using high-resolution structural brain MRI, Ottman et al. (2008) found no evidence for structural brain anomalies in any of 17 affected individuals from 7 families with genetically-confirmed ADPEAF. However, functional MRI and magnetoencephalography indicated that that individuals with ADPEAF have deficits in auditory and language processing.



CACNA1H
**{Epilepsy, idiopathic generalized, susceptibility to, 6}, 611942 (3)**
Childhood absence epilepsy is a subtype of idiopathic generalized epilepsy. For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of childhood absence epilepsy and idiopathic generalized epilepsy, see ECA1 (600131) and (600669), respectively.
Heron et al. (2004) observed associations between variants in the CACNA1H gene and idiopathic generalized epilepsy in 2 unrelated families. In 1 family, 3 affected individuals had a heterozygous P618L variant (607904.0005), 2 affected patients did not have the variant, and 1 unaffected member carried the variant. In the second family, only 1 of 2 affected individuals carried the P618L variant. The phenotypes were variable and included febrile seizures and myoclonic/astatic epilepsy. Although the variant was not identified in 96 controls, it did not segregate perfectly with seizures in either family.
Heron et al. (2007) identified a different heterozygous variant in the CACNA1H gene (A876T; 607904.0006) in 4 affected members of a family with idiopathic generalized epilepsy. The specific phenotypes were variable and included childhood absence epilepsy, febrile seizures, temporal lobe epilepsy, and generalized epilepsy.
**Hyperaldosteronism, familial, type IV, 617027 (3), AD**
Scholl et al. (2015) studied 5 unrelated patients with hyperaldosteronism and a heterozygous mutation in the CACNA1H gene (see MOLECULAR GENETICS). All presented with hypertension by age 10 years and had elevated aldosterone levels despite low plasma renin activity, consistent with autonomous adrenal aldosterone production. Adrenal imaging showed no evidence of mass or hyperplasia at the time of presentation. There were no other recurrent or distinctive features in the index cases, specifically no history of seizures or neurologic or neuromuscular disorders. Two of the probands had an affected parent.



PRDM16
**Left ventricular noncompaction 8, 615373 (3), AD**
Arndt et al. (2013) described 3 patients with left ventricular noncompaction who were found to have mutations in the PRDM16 gene (see MOLECULAR GENETICS). The first patient was a man who presented at 33 years of age with severe biventricular heart failure with systolic and diastolic dysfunction, secondary pulmonary hypertension, and dilation of both atria and ventricles. Echocardiography showed involvement of apical and lateral segments, with marked thickening of the inferior noncompacted layer below the left ventricular papillary muscles and thinning of the compacted layer. He received a biventricular intracardiac defibrillator. The second patient, who was diagnosed at 12 years of age due to arrhythmias, showed mild to moderate left ventricular dysfunction and dilation in addition to LVNC. Echocardiography showed involvement of the left midventricular lateral wall. The third patient was a man who underwent reconstruction of a dysplastic mitral valve due to grade 3 mitral insufficiency at 11 years of age, at which time the left atrium and ventricle were enlarged with preserved cardiac function. Histology of a left ventricular biopsy taken at surgery showed increased interstitial fibrosis and myocyte disarray.



OCA2
**Albinism, oculocutaneous, type II, 203200 (3), AR**
Tyrosinase-positive oculocutaneous albinism (OCA, type II) is an autosomal recessive disorder in which the biosynthesis of melanin pigment is reduced in skin, hair, and eyes. Although affected infants may appear at birth to have OCA type I, or complete absence of melanin pigment, most patients with OCA type II acquire small amounts of pigment with age. Individuals with OCA type II have the characteristic visual anomalies associated with albinism, including decreased acuity and nystagmus, which are usually less severe than in OCA type I (Lee et al., 1994; King et al., 2001).
OCA type II has a highly variable phenotype. The hair of affected individuals may turn darker with age, and pigmented nevi or freckles may be seen. African and African American individuals may have yellow hair and blue-gray or hazel irides. One phenotypic variant, 'brown OCA,' has been described in African and African American populations and is characterized by light brown hair and skin color and gray to tan irides. The hair and irides may turn darker with time and the skin may tan with sun exposure; the ocular features of albinism are present in all variants (King et al., 2001). In addition, previous reports of so-called 'autosomal recessive ocular albinism,' (see, e.g., Witkop et al., 1978 and O'Donnell et al., 1978) with little or no obvious skin involvement, are now considered most likely to be part of the phenotypic spectrum of OCA1 or OCA2 (Lee et al., 1994; King et al., 2001).
Trevor-Roper (1952, 1963) reported 2 albino parents who had 4 normally pigmented children. Inheritance was most likely autosomal recessive. X-linked albinism could be excluded because the obligate heterozygous daughters of the father did not have mosaic pigmentary patterns in the ocular fundus. Trevor-Roper (1963) suggested that the parents had different forms of albinism. Applying the chemical method of Kugelman and Van Scott (1961), Witkop (1966) examined the family reported by Trevor-Roper (1952, 1963) and found that whereas the mother did not show pigmentation in the Kugelman-Van Scott test, the father did show pigment. Witkop (1966) asserted that it is difficult to distinguish tyrosinase-positive from tyrosinase-negative albinism clinically, especially in Caucasians. Pigmented nevi in tyrosine-positive cases may be the only clue. In blacks with this form of albinism, the hair is yellow and many pigmented spots develop in the skin. In such cases, Witkop (1966) hypothesized a block in the formation of eumelanin with a continuing formation of pheomelanin.
Witkop et al. (1978) referred to 4 families in which males and females were equally severely affected with a form of ocular albinism without apparent skin involvement. Affected females had ocular changes similar to those of hemizygous sales with X-linked ocular albinism (OA1; 300500). Some of the parents had diaphanous irides. None of the mothers had affected male relatives, and 2 of the families were Amish with consanguineous parents, suggesting autosomal recessive inheritance. The authors noted that ocular albinism had been reported in a female by Scialfa (1972). O'Donnell et al. (1978) observed 7 females and 2 males from unrelated Caucasian kindreds with ocular albinism. Affected individuals showed impaired vision, translucent irides, congenital nystagmus, photophobia, albinotic fundi with hyperplasia of the fovea, and strabismus. Unlike the X-linked form of ocular albinism, females were as severely affected as males, obligatory heterozygotes lacked the mosaic pattern, and skin and hairbulbs did not show giant pigment granules. Autosomal recessive inheritance was suggested.
Castle et al. (1988) could demonstrate no asymmetry on monocular testing of visual evoked potentials to suggest an abnormality of decussation in heterozygotes.
Witkop et al. (1989) stated that tyrosinase-positive albinism was the form present in the Hopi and Zuni Indians studied by Woolf (1965) and Woolf and Dukepoo (1969). This form was also found in the Brandywine triracial isolate (Witkop et al., 1972).
In southern Africa, negroids with tyrosinase-positive ocular cutaneous albinism present with 2 distinctly different phenotypes, with or without darkly pigmented patches (ephelides, or dendritic freckles) on exposed areas of the skin. These phenotypes were concordant within families. Among 111 albinos from southern Africa, Kromberg et al. (1989) found a correlation between the presence of ephelides and a lower risk of developing skin cancer, possibly as the result of the presence of some melanin pigment offering photoprotection.
Brown oculocutaneous albinism (BOCA) in humans is linked to the P locus, where mutations causing OCA2 are located. The occurrence of both OCA2 and BOCA within the same family suggested that these disorders are allelic (Manga, 1997).
Using MRI, Schmitz et al. (2003) found that the size and configuration of the optic chiasm in humans with albinism are distinctly different from the chiasms of normal control subjects. These chiasmal changes reflect the atypical crossing of the optic fibers, irrespective of the causative gene mutation. Eight patients had tyrosinase gene-related OCA1, 4 patients had P gene-related OCA2, and 1 had ocular albinism (OA1); the albinism-causing mutation had not been identified in 4 other patients.
Clinical Variability
Chiang et al. (2008) noted that heterozygous carriers of the common 2.7-kb deletion in the OCA2 gene (611409.0001) from sub-Saharan Africa are not hypopigmented. However, Caucasian individuals with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS; 176270) or Angelman syndrome (AS; 105830), who are haploinsufficient for the OCA2 gene, often show hypopigmentation. The authors concluded that the phenotype of haploinsufficiency for the OCA2 gene depends upon the genetic pigmentary background of the individual. Chiang et al. (2008) presented a Hispanic family in which the proband with OCA2 was compound heterozygous for the 2.7-kb deletion and another pathogenic mutation in the OCA2 gene. Family members carrying the heterozygous 2.7-kb deletion had mild skin hypopigmentation without ocular defects. The findings suggested that haploinsufficiency of the OCA2 gene can contribute to skin hypopigmentation that may be more obvious in Caucasian or Hispanic populations compared to Africans, who have color above the threshold of distinction. The report of Chiang et al. (2008) was in agreement with the findings of Sulem et al. (2007), who found a role for variations in the OCA2 gene in skin/hair/eye pigmentation (SHEP1; 227220).
**[Skin/hair/eye pigmentation 1, blue/nonblue eyes], 227220 (3), AR**
Genetic Heterogeneity of Variation in Skin/Hair/Eye Pigmentation
Multiple genes influence normal human skin, hair, and/or eye pigmentation. Pigmentation phenotypes influenced by variation in the OCA2 gene are termed SHEP1. The SHEP2 association (266300) is determined by variation at the MC1R locus (155555) and describes a phenotype predominantly characterized by red hair and fair skin. SHEP3 (601800) encompasses pigment variation influenced by the TYR gene (606933); SHEP4 (113750), that influenced by the SLC24A5 gene (609802). Variation in the SLC45A2 (606202) and SLC24A4 (609840) genes result in the phenotypic associations SHEP5 (227240) and SHEP6 (210750), respectively. Sequence variation thought to affect expression of KITLG (184745) results in the SHEP7 (611664) phenotypic association. SHEP8 (611724) is associated with variation in the IRF4 gene (601900). Polymorphism in the 3-prime untranslated region of the ASIP gene (600201) influences the SHEP9 association (611742). The SHEP10 association (612267) comprises variation in the TPCN2 gene (612163), and SHEP11 (612271) is associated with polymorphism near the TYRP1 gene (115501).
Pigmentation of hair, eye, and skin is among the most visible examples of human phenotypic variation, with a broad normal range that is subject to substantial geographic stratification. Pigmentation in human tissues is attributable to the number, type, and cellular distribution of melanosomes (subcellular compartments produced by melanocytes that synthesize and store the light-absorbing polymer melanin) (Sulem et al., 2007). Variation in pigmentation among individuals is thought to be caused by biochemical differences that affect the number of melanosomes produced, the type of melanin synthesized (either black-brown eumelanin or red-yellow pheomelanin), and the size and shape of the melanosomes. The key physiologic role of skin pigmentation seems to be to absorb ultraviolet radiation (UVR). This protective role must be weighted against the reduced amount of UVR available for the synthesis of vitamin D3. It is generally believed that the geographic distribution of human skin pigmentation reflects a history of adaptation to latitude-dependent levels of UVR, with individuals tending to have lighter pigmentation with increasing distance from the equator (Relethford, 1997). The majority of variation in human eye and hair color is found among individuals of European ancestry, with most other human populations fixed for brown eyes and black hair (Sulem et al., 2007). Stokowski et al. (2007) cited studies suggesting that the genetic factors influencing lighter pigmentation in Europeans may be far different from the mechanism for lighter pigmentation in East Asians (Relethford, 1997; Norton et al., 2006; Myles et al., 2007). Given the direct correlation between skin pigmentation and incident UV exposure, it has long been postulated that it is a trait under intense selective pressure (Stokowski et al., 2007). Pigmentary mutants in model organisms and human disorders of pigmentation have been the main source for the discovery of genes involved in skin color. More than 100 pigmentation genes have been identified in mouse alone, most with identified human orthologs, and at least 18 genes had been implicated in human albinism.



CR1
**[Blood group, Knops system], 607486 (3)**
**{Malaria, severe, resistance to}, 611162 (3)**
Malaria, a major cause of child mortality worldwide, is caused by mosquito-borne hematoprotozoan parasites of the genus Plasmodium. Of the 4 species that infect humans, P. falciparum causes the most severe forms of malaria and is the major cause of death and disease. Although less fatal, P. malariae, P. ovale, and, in particular, P. vivax infections are major causes of morbidity. The parasite cycle involves a first stage in liver cells and a subsequent stage at erythrocytes, when malaria symptoms occur. A wide spectrum of phenotypes are observed, from asymptomatic infection to mild disease, including fever and mild anemia, to severe disease, including cerebral malaria, profound anemia, and respiratory distress. Genetic factors influence the response to infection, as well as disease progression and severity. Malaria is the strongest known selective pressure in the recent history of the human genome, and it is the evolutionary driving force behind sickle-cell disease (603903), thalassemia (see 141800), glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency (300908), and other erythrocyte defects that together constitute the most common mendelian diseases of humans (Kwiatkowski, 2005; Campino et al., 2006).



NME8
**Ciliary dyskinesia, primary, 6, 610852 (3), AR**
Duriez et al. (2007) reported a 13-year-old girl with primary ciliary dyskinesia. She had chronic respiratory infections with bronchiectasis, chronic sinusitis, and serous otitis. She also had situs ambiguus with the heart and the liver located centrally. Electron microscopy showed that 66% of her respiratory cilia had shortened or absent outer dynein arms. The authors reported a unrelated patient who also had chronic respiratory infections with bronchiectasis, chronic sinusitis, and serous otitis, but he had situs inversus totalis. Electron microscopy of his respiratory cilia showed no ultrastructural defect of the respiratory cilia, but 40% were immotile.



ARMS2
**{Macular degeneration, age-related, 8}, 613778 (3)**
Age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is a common complex disorder that affects the central region of the retina (macula) and is the leading cause of legal blindness in white Americans over age 65. Contributions of environmental factors and genetic susceptibility have been identified. The strongest nongenetic risk factor for ARMD is cigarette smoking.
For a general phenotypic description and a discussion of genetic heterogeneity of ARMD, see 603075.



GLCCI1
**{Glucocorticoid therapy, response to}, 614400 (3)**



ZFAT
**{Autoimmune thyroid disease, susceptibility to, 3}, 608175 (3)**



